Citation: Petrie, M.A.; Johnson, K.A.;
Dubey, O.; Shields, R.K. Exercise
Prescription Principles among
Physicians and Physical Therapists
for Patients with Impaired Glucose
Control: A Cross-Sectional Study. J.
Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
jfmk8030112
Academic Editors: Cristina Cortis,
Andrea Fusco and Carl Foster
Received: 29 June 2023
Revised: 19 July 2023
Accepted: 3 August 2023
Published: 7 August 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Journal of 
Functional Morphology 
and Kinesiology 
Article
Exercise Prescription Principles among Physicians and Physical
Therapists for Patients with Impaired Glucose Control:
A Cross-Sectional Study
Michael A. Petrie
 , Kristin A. Johnson
 , Olga Dubey and Richard K. Shields *
Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Science, Carver College of Medicine, The University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; michael-petrie@uiowa.edu (M.A.P .); kristin-a-johnson@uiowa.edu (K.A.J.);
olga-dubey@uiowa.edu (O.D.)
*Correspondence: richard-shields@uiowa.edu; Tel.: +1-319-335-9791; Fax: +1-319-335-9707
Abstract: Exercise confers a multitude of beneﬁts with limited adverse side effects, making it a
powerful “medication” for a plethora of diseases. In people living with uncontrolled glucose levels,
exercise can be an effective “medication” to assist in the management of hyperglycemia. We sought
to survey healthcare providers (physicians and physical therapists) to determine the current state
of exercise recommendation for people with glucose control issues. Healthcare providers were
surveyed from six academic medical centers in the Midwest to determine the recommended exercise
parameters (type, frequency, duration, intensity, and timing) for patients with glucose control issues.
Data from 209 practitioners who completed the survey were used for analysis. Chi-square tests
were used to determine differences in exercise recommendations between physical therapists (PTs)
and physicians (MD/DOs). PTs and MD/DOs recommended similar exercise parameters. Of all
respondents, 78.9% recommended exercise to patients with glucose control issues. Respondents who
considered themselves to be active exercisers were more likely to recommend exercise than those
who were not exercisers. Only 6.1% of all respondents recommended post-meal exercise. Healthcare
providers overwhelmingly recommended exercise for people with glucose control issues, but the
“timing” is not congruent with best practice recommendations.
Keywords: exercise; recommendation; diabetes; glucose; clinical practice
1. Introduction
Americans are becoming less physically active [ 1], propelling an epidemic of non-
communicable diseases [ 2–4], including diabetes [ 4]. Nearly half of the US population
lives with prediabetes (38.0%) or diabetes (11.3%) [ 5], a concerning percentage given this
metabolic disease is a primary predictor of all-cause mortality [ 6]. Type II Diabetes is
characterized by uncontrolled blood glucose levels that develop when the body loses its
sensitivity to insulin [ 7]. Therefore, medications that assist in regulating blood glucose are
often the primary prescription for people with this disease. In the United States, the annual
cost of insulin and anti-diabetic medications exceed $30 billion dollars and comprises one
of the largest healthcare expenditures for the disease [ 8]. Exercise, often referred to as
“medicine”, is another intervention that assists in regulating blood glucose and insulin
levels in people with diabetes [ 9], is cost-effective [ 10], and promotes a “patient-centered”
lifestyle approach to metabolic health [11].
Exercise improves metabolism by the activation of skeletal muscle [ 12–14]. Skeletal
muscle is a conduit to biomechanical performance but is also a powerful endocrine or-
gan [ 15] that, when activated, secretes hormones (myokines) [ 13] that reduce systemic
inﬂammation, improve metabolism, and regulate blood glucose levels in people with and
without glucose intolerance [ 9,16]. Skeletal muscle has a strong effect on blood glucose
in that it uses more than 80% of the substrate during exercise if the timing is congruent
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112. https://doi.org/10.3390/jfmk8030112 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jfmk
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 2 of 11
with a meal [ 17,18]. Glucose enters skeletal muscle from the bloodstream via insulin-
dependent and insulin-independent pathways [ 19,20]. In people living with diabetes, the
insulin-dependent pathways are impaired, yet the insulin-independent pathways, like the
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathway, remain intact [ 21,22]. Muscle contraction
triggers the AMPK pathway to mobilize the GLUT4 glucose transport protein to skeletal
muscle cell surfaces to open the “door” for glucose to enter the cell [ 23]. Importantly,
activity and exercise reduce blood glucose levels and decreases peak insulin following
a meal [ 16]. Chronic exposure to elevated levels of insulin after a meal may ultimately
contribute to reduced insulin sensitivity [ 24,25]. While the long-term adaptations to insulin
receptors are well understood through chronic exercise studies, acute responses of exercise
on insulin and glucose, after a meal, are now contributing to recommendations for “move-
ment or exercise” after eating as a lifestyle behavior [ 26]. Accordingly, a lifestyle of routine
muscle activation by bouts of exercise mitigates the development of diabetes through
chronic adaptations [4] but also via acute reduction of needed insulin after a meal [16].
The recommended “dose” of exercise for people living with diabetes was recently
updated by the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) [26] and the American Dia-
betes Association (ADA) [ 27] to include post-prandial exercise [ 16]. Many of the published
exercise guidelines are similar for people with and without metabolic disorders, including
the recommendation to accumulate a minimum of 150 min/week of moderate-to-vigorous
aerobic exercise spread over at least three days. Resistance exercise is also recommended at
least two days per week, and most guidelines recommend combining aerobic and resistance
training within the same session [ 28]. The exercise guidelines speciﬁc for people living with
diabetes also recommend exercise after eating, or post-prandial exercise, as it attenuates the
hyperglycemic and hyper-insulinemic loads from a meal [ 16]. Various types of exercise are
effective for mitigating the post-prandial glycemic response [ 29] and greater beneﬁts occur
when exercise is performed promptly after eating [ 30]. In light of the recently updated
exercise guidelines, we sought to determine if the exercise recommendations provided
by healthcare practitioners for people with glucose control issues include post-prandial
exercise.
The purpose of this study was to determine the congruency of the recommended dose
of exercise (type, frequency, duration, intensity, timing) for people who have glucose control
issues among practicing physicians and physical therapists. Our primary interest related
to whether healthcare practitioners include post-prandial exercise as part of a routine
prescription. We suspected that the timing of exercise relative to meals is not typically
prescribed by practitioners who treat people with glucose control issues.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Study Design, Development, and Setting
Using a secure online survey platform (Qualtrics), a 10-question survey was developed
to perform a cross-sectional study of healthcare practitioners regarding their recommended
exercise parameters for people with glucose control issues between June 2022 and January
2023. The survey ascertained the exercise prescription practice and exercise status of the
physicians and physical therapists, determined the healthcare providers’ exercise- based
referral practices, and ascertained the recommended “dose” of exercise for people with
glucose control issues by determining the type, frequency, duration, intensity, and timing
of their recommended exercise prescription. The survey was piloted among a team of
physicians and physical therapists ( n= 10) to establish face validity. The survey was
designed to take less than 3 min as recommended by the survey review team. This survey
and research protocol was approved by the University of Iowa Institutional Review Board
(IRB). The ﬁnal research protocol was congruent with the planned protocol as approved by
the IRB.
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 3 of 11
2.2. Survey Participants
Eligible participants included English-speaking physicians (MD/DO) and physical
therapists (PT) with email accounts across six major academic medical institutions in the
Midwest of the United States. An email invitation to participate in the survey was delivered
to 10,059 healthcare professionals (9411 MD/DO, 648 PT). Survey questions were reviewed
and modiﬁed based on input from a separate panel of physical therapists and physicians
who had expertise in treating metabolic disease. As part of that review, we included a
question related to the personal active exercise habits of the respondents. We also focused
the survey so that only participants who treated people with glucose control issues were
included in the ﬁnal analysis. An example of the survey is available in Appendix A.
2.3. Statistical Analysis
Cronbach’s Alpha was calculated to assess the internal consistency (reliability) of
the survey. A percentage of physician and physical therapist responses was calculated
for each survey question. Chi-square tests of homogeneity were used to evaluate for
differences in exercise recommendation percentages among and between physicians and
physical therapists. Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt tests were used to evaluate for differences in
response from an expected probability frequency estimated for each question. The expected
frequency (null hypothesis) was based upon the number of answer options per question
(e.g., a question with four answer options had an expected frequency of 25%). Signiﬁcance
was set at p< 0.05.
3. Results
3.1. Survey Properties, Exercise Advice, and Exercise Status
Among the 1649 practitioners who opened the email (1542 MD/DO, 107 PT), 216 prac-
titioners started the survey. Data from the 209 practitioners who completed the survey (166
MD/DO, 43 PT) were used for data analysis. The average time for respondents to complete
the survey was 1 min and 40 s.
Cronbach’s Alpha was 0.81, supporting a high internal consistency (reliability) of
the survey. One hundred percent of the pre-study expert panel (5 physical therapists;
5 physicians) indicated that the survey captured key principles necessary to understand
exercise prescription for patients with glucose control issues.
Similar proportions of physical therapists and physicians offer exercise-related advice
for people with glucose control issues, with 78.9% of all surveyed practitioners indicating
they advise exercise (Figure 1A, p= 0.216). The proportion of practitioners who considered
themselves to be active exercisers was similar between physical therapists and physicians,
and 87.1% of practitioners reported that they actively exercise (Figure 1B, p= 0.428). There
were similar groupings of practitioners by exercise-advice status and personal exercise
status between physical therapists and physicians (Figure 1C, p= 0.345). When practitioners
were grouped by their personal exercise status, active exercisers were 31.1% more likely to
offer exercise-related advice to patients with glucose control issues than practitioners who
were non-exercisers (Figure 1D, p< 0.001).
3.2. Exercise Type, Frequency, Duration, and Intensity
Most of the practitioners who advise patients about exercise recommend more than
one type of exercise: 17.6% recommend one type, 30.9% recommend two types, 50.3%
recommend three types, and 1.2% recommend four types of exercise. As compared to
physicians, physical therapists were 24.4% more likely to recommend anaerobic exercise
(p= 0.013), but the professions were similar in their recommendations of other types of
exercise (all p’s > 0.193), with 91.5% of all practitioners recommending aerobic exercise
and 82.4% recommending general physical activity (Figure 2A). Physical therapists and
physicians recommend different exercise frequencies ( p< 0.001), with physical therapists
more likely to prescribe >3 but 5 sessions and physicians more likely not to specify the
number of sessions (Figure 2B). Together, 6.7% and 25.5% of practitioners recommend >1 but
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 4 of 11
3 sessions and >5 sessions, respectively. Physical therapists and physicians recommend
similar exercise durations ( p= 0.256), and they most commonly recommend >20–30 min
per session (Figure 2C). Recommended exercise intensities were similar between physical
therapists and physicians ( p= 0.076), with the majority of practitioners not specifying
exercise intensity based on maximal heart rate (Figure 2D).
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 11 
 
 
Figure 1. Exercise Advice and Exercise Status. The  percentage of surveyed healthcare practitioners 
who offer exercise -related advice ( A) and those who consider themselves to be active exercisers ( B). 
The percentage of healthcare providers grouped by their exercise advice and personal exercise sta-
tus (C). Exercise r and prescriber: those who recommend exercise for people with glucose control 
issues and who consider themselves to be active exercisers. Exerciser and non-prescriber: those who 
do not recommend exercise for people with glucos e control issues and who consider themselves to 
be active exercisers. Non -exerciser and prescriber: those who recommend exercise for people with 
glucose control issues and who do not consider themselves to be active exercisers. Non -exerciser 
and non-prescriber: those who do not recommend exercise for people with glucose control issues 
and who do not consider themselves to be active exercisers. The percentage of healthcare providers 
who offer exercise -related advice for people with glucose control issues bas ed on their personal 
exercise status ( D). Physicians  (MD/DO); physical therapists  (PT); combination of the two  (Total). * 
Indicates a significant ( p < 0.05) difference between healthcare providers who consider themselves 
to be active exercisers and those who do not consider themselves to be active exercisers.  
3.2. Exercise Type, Frequency, Duration, and Intensity  
Most of the practitioners who advise patients about exercise recommend more than 
one type of exercise: 17.6% recommend one type, 30.9% recommend t wo types, 50.3% rec-
ommend three types, and 1.2% recommend four types of exercise. As compared to physi-
cians, physical therapists were 24.4% more likely to recommend anaerobic exercise ( p = 
0.013), but the professions were similar in their recommendations o f other types of exer-
cise (all p’s > 0.193), with 91.5% of all practitioners recommending aerobic exercise and 
82.4% recommending general physical activity ( Figure 2A). Physical therapists and phy-
sicians recommend different exercise frequencies ( p < 0.001), with physical therapists more 
likely to pr escribe >3 but ≤5 sessions and physicians more likely not to specify the number 
of sessions ( Figure 2B). Together, 6.7% and 25.5% of practitioners recommend >1 but ≤3 
Figure 1. Exercise Advice and Exercise Status. The percentage of surveyed healthcare practitioners
who offer exercise-related advice ( A) and those who consider themselves to be active exercisers ( B).
The percentage of healthcare providers grouped by their exercise advice and personal exercise status
(C). Exerciser and prescriber: those who recommend exercise for people with glucose control issues
and who consider themselves to be active exercisers. Exerciser and non-prescriber: those who do
not recommend exercise for people with glucose control issues and who consider themselves to
be active exercisers. Non-exerciser and prescriber: those who recommend exercise for people with
glucose control issues and who do not consider themselves to be active exercisers. Non-exerciser and
non-prescriber: those who do not recommend exercise for people with glucose control issues and
who do not consider themselves to be active exercisers. The percentage of healthcare providers who
offer exercise-related advice for people with glucose control issues based on their personal exercise
status ( D). Physicians (MD/DO); physical therapists (PT); combination of the two (Total). * Indicates
a signiﬁcant ( p< 0.05) difference between healthcare providers who consider themselves to be active
exercisers and those who do not consider themselves to be active exercisers.
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 5 of 11
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 11 
 
sessions and >5 sessions, respectively. Physical therapists and physicians recommend sim-
ilar exercise durations ( p = 0.256), and they most commonly recommend >2 0–30 min per 
session ( Figure 2C). Recommended exercise intensities were similar between physical 
therapists and physicians ( p = 0.076), with the majority of practitioners not specifying  ex-
ercise intensity based on maximal heart rate ( Figure 2D). 
 
Figure 2. Exercise Type, Frequency, Duration, and Intensity. The type ( A), frequency ( B), duration 
(C), and intensity ( D) of exercise recommended by healthcare providers for patients with gluco se 
control issues. Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists (PT), and combination of the two (Total). * 
Indicates a significant ( p < 0.05) difference between MD/DO and PT.  
3.3. Exercise Timing  
Physical therapists and physicians recommend similar timing of exercise ( p = 0.432), 
with most practitioners not recommending a specific time (57.0%) , or they recommend 
anytime (40.0%) ( Figure 3A). Physical therapists and physicians were similar in recom-
mending exercise timed to eating ( p = 0.092), with the vast majority of practitioners not 
recommending exercise based on the time of a meal ( Figure 3B). 
Figure 2. Exercise Type, Frequency, Duration, and Intensity. The type ( A), frequency ( B), duration
(C), and intensity ( D) of exercise recommended by healthcare providers for patients with glucose
control issues. Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists (PT), and combination of the two (Total).
* Indicates a signiﬁcant ( p< 0.05) difference between MD/DO and PT.
3.3. Exercise Timing
Physical therapists and physicians recommend similar timing of exercise ( p= 0.432),
with most practitioners not recommending a speciﬁc time (57.0%), or they recommend
anytime (40.0%) (Figure 3A). Physical therapists and physicians were similar in recom-
mending exercise timed to eating ( p= 0.092), with the vast majority of practitioners not
recommending exercise based on the time of a meal (Figure 3B).
3.4. Exercise Referrals
Physical therapists and physicians differed in referral practices ( p= 0.029) as physical
therapists were 9.2% more likely than physicians to “always” refer patients with glucose
control issues to exercise specialists (Figure 4A). Over 50% of all practitioners indicated
they “sometimes” refer to specialists. Among the referring practitioners, 47.4% refer to one
specialty, 42.4% refer to two specialties, and 10.2% refer to three specialties. The types of
exercise specialists to whom practitioners refer were similar between physical therapists
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 6 of 11
and physicians (Figure 4B, p= 0.209), with physical therapists being the specialist of choice
for both physicians and physical therapists (76.3%).
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 11 
 
 
Figure 3. Exercise Timing. The time of day to exercise ( A) and the timing of exercise relative to meals 
(B) recommended by healthcare providers who offer ex ercise-related advice for patients with glu-
cose control issues. Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists (PT), and combination of the two (To-
tal). 
3.4. Exercise Referrals  
Physical therapists and physicians differed in referral practices ( p = 0.029) as physical 
therapists were 9.2% more likely than physicians to “always” refer patients with glucose 
control issues to exercise specialists ( Figure 4A). Over 50% of all practitioners indicated 
they “sometimes” refer to specialists. Among the referring practit ioners, 47.4% refer to 
one specialty, 42.4% refer to two specialties, and 10.2% refer to three specialties. The types 
of exercise specialists to whom practitioners refer were similar between physical thera-
pists and physicians ( Figure 4B, p = 0.209), with p hysical therapists being the specialist of 
choice for both physicians and physical therapists (76.3%).  
 
Figure 4. Exercise Referrals. Healthcare providers’ referral practices ( A) and exercise specialists to 
whom they refer patients with glucose  control issues (B). Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists 
(PT), and the combination of the two (Total). * Indicates a significant ( p < 0.05) difference between 
MD/DO and PT.  
  
Figure 3. Exercise Timing. The time of day to exercise ( A) and the timing of exercise relative to meals
(B) recommended by healthcare providers who offer exercise-related advice for patients with glucose
control issues. Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists (PT), and combination of the two (Total).
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 11 
 
 
Figure 3. Exercise Timing. The time of day to exercise ( A) and the timing of exercise relative to meals 
(B) recommended by healthcare providers who offer ex ercise-related advice for patients with glu-
cose control issues. Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists (PT), and combination of the two (To-
tal). 
3.4. Exercise Referrals  
Physical therapists and physicians differed in referral practices ( p = 0.029) as physical 
therapists were 9.2% more likely than physicians to “always” refer patients with glucose 
control issues to exercise specialists ( Figure 4A). Over 50% of all practitioners indicated 
they “sometimes” refer to specialists. Among the referring practit ioners, 47.4% refer to 
one specialty, 42.4% refer to two specialties, and 10.2% refer to three specialties. The types 
of exercise specialists to whom practitioners refer were similar between physical thera-
pists and physicians ( Figure 4B, p = 0.209), with p hysical therapists being the specialist of 
choice for both physicians and physical therapists (76.3%).  
 
Figure 4. Exercise Referrals. Healthcare providers’ referral practices ( A) and exercise specialists to 
whom they refer patients with glucose  control issues (B). Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists 
(PT), and the combination of the two (Total). * Indicates a significant ( p < 0.05) difference between 
MD/DO and PT.  
  
Figure 4. Exercise Referrals. Healthcare providers’ referral practices ( A) and exercise specialists to
whom they refer patients with glucose control issues ( B). Physicians (MD/DO), physical therapists
(PT), and the combination of the two (Total). * Indicates a signiﬁcant ( p< 0.05) difference between
MD/DO and PT.
4. Discussion
The primary purpose of this study was to determine the congruency of healthcare
practitioners’ exercise recommendations for people with glucose control issues. The survey
revealed several key ﬁndings: 1. most practitioners offer exercise-related advice; 2. practi-
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 7 of 11
tioners who are active exercisers are more likely to prescribe exercise; 3. physical therapists
and physicians prescribe similar exercise protocols in accordance to guidelines, and 4.
physical therapists and physicians do not prescribe post-prandial exercise which is not
congruent with current exercise guidelines. The high prevalence of offering exercise-related
advice from these practitioners indicates healthcare providers are generally aware of the
beneﬁts of exercise for people with metabolic impairment, but inconsistencies in the timing
of exercise after a meal suggest a general lack of speciﬁc knowledge about current “timing”
recommendations for people with blood glucose control issues.
4.1. Exercise Prescription Practices Compared to Recommended Exercise Guidelines
The ﬁrst major revelation from this survey is that only 6.1% of healthcare practitioners
recommend post-prandial exercise for people with glucose control issues. This ﬁnding
is not congruent with the updated ACSM guidelines [ 26] and suggests that healthcare
practitioners, both physicians and physical therapists, are not aware of the contemporary
research supporting exercise after a meal to reduce post-prandial insulin and glucose in
people with metabolic disorders [ 16]. Various types of exercise such as walking, cycling,
and resistance exercise are effective for reducing post-prandial glucose levels [ 29]. Ini-
tiating exercise promptly after a meal is important as the post-prandial hyperglycemic
peak is blunted more by exercise that begins <30 min after eating as opposed to starting
30 min [ 29,30]. Post-prandial exercise not only reduces blood glucose levels but, perhaps
more importantly, is associated with lower amounts of insulin in the bloodstream [ 31,32],
thereby reducing a factor that precipitates insulin receptor desensitization and perhaps the
development of diabetes [24,25].
Despite the lack of congruency with post-prandial exercise recommendations for both
physicians and physical therapists, nearly 80% of all practitioners offer exercise-related
advice to people with glucose control issues. This ﬁnding is consistent with the high
prevalence of primary care physicians (93.3%) who “often” or “always” prescribe physical
activity for adult patients with chronic disease [ 33] and with prescription practices from
2010 in which 76% of physicians reported providing weight-loss counseling and physical
activity instruction for patients with diabetes [ 34]. However, our ﬁndings conﬁrmed that
both physical therapists and physicians who consider themselves active exercisers were
31.1% more likely to offer exercise-related advice when compared to their non-exercising
counterparts. This ﬁnding is consistent with exercise prescription patterns for people with
cardiovascular disease [35].
When types of exercises were considered, among both physical therapists and physi-
cians, aerobic exercise was the most recommended type of exercise (91.5%), followed by
general physical activity (82.4%). These recommendations are congruent with ACSM exer-
cise guidelines that recommend adults with diabetes participate in regular aerobic exercise
and that “some physical activity is better than none” [ 26]. Anaerobic exercise was not
prescribed as often as the other types of exercise (57.6%) among both groups of practitioners.
Current guidelines recommend at least 2 days of resistance training per week as it improves
several metabolic biomarkers, increases insulin sensitivity, and reduces A1C [ 26]. Practi-
tioners did not recommend a speciﬁc time of day to exercise (57.0%), or they recommended
exercising at any speciﬁc time of day (40.0%). There is some support for better glycemic
control [ 36] and insulin sensitivity [ 37] in people with metabolic disorder when exercise is
performed in the afternoon as opposed to the morning, but this work is still evolving as
we discover more about circadian rhythms and metabolic gene regulation [ 38,39]. Current
ACSM guidelines do not recommend a speciﬁc time of day to exercise, citing a need for
more research in this area [26].
4.2. Similar Exercise Prescription Practices between Physical Therapists and Physicians
There was internal consistency between physical therapists and physicians among
several aspects of exercise prescription. Physical therapists and physicians recommend
similar times of day to exercise, timing of exercise to meals, durations of exercise, and
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 8 of 11
exercise intensity based on maximal heart rate. Both professions refer to similar types
of exercise specialists. Physicians and physical therapists differed in exercise frequency
recommendations, with physical therapists more likely to recommend >3 but 5 sessions
per week and physicians more likely not to specify exercise frequency, a ﬁnding that is not
congruent with best practice. Physical therapists were also more likely than physicians to
recommend anaerobic exercise and to “always” refer patients with glucose control issues to
another physical exercise specialist. Increasing referrals to exercise specialists may improve
exercise recommendations by overcoming some of the barriers to exercise prescription [ 40].
4.3. Limitations
This survey does not elucidate the speciﬁc exercise prescriptions of healthcare providers
but focuses on key concepts or principles that form the framework for sound exercise pre-
scription. Our data were limited in that they represented a broad swath of healthcare
providers across the Midwest, so we cannot ascertain if prescriptions vary based on geo-
graphical locations. Although we narrowed the survey so that the healthcare providers
made recommendations only for patients with “blood glucose control” issues, we did not
hone in on the speciﬁc diagnoses. Thus, we cannot link these recommendations to any
speciﬁc patient type. Lastly, our sample size did not enable us to analyze stratiﬁed data
based on characteristics of the healthcare centers for which the respondents were employed
and the personal exercise habits of all practitioners. Future investigations are warranted to
better understand if respondents’ variations in practice inﬂuenced their prescriptions for
exercise. Nonetheless, this study offers an important ﬁnding, not previously discovered,
regarding post-prandial exercise prescription among physicians and physical therapists
that is not congruent with contemporary guidelines for people with glucose control issues.
5. Conclusions
In summary, physicians and physical therapists are congruent in their exercise pre-
scription principles for people with glucose control issues. Importantly, both physicians
and physical therapists are not congruent with “newer” recommendations related to post-
prandial “timing” of exercise among people with glucose control issues. Future work is
underway in our lab to better understand the precise dose of post-prandial exercise to
optimize insulin response in people with and without disability.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.K.S.; methodology, R.K.S.; formal analysis, M.A.P .,
K.A.J., O.D. and R.K.S.; investigation, M.A.P ., K.A.J., O.D. and R.K.S.; resources, R.K.S.; writing—
original draft preparation, M.A.P ., K.A.J. and R.K.S.; writing—review and editing, M.A.P ., K.A.J., O.D.
and R.K.S.; visualization, M.A.P ., K.A.J., O.D. and R.K.S.; funding acquisition, R.K.S. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study was funded, in part, by the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research
within the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development:
Grants R01HD084645 and RO1HD082109 to R.K.S.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board (or Ethics Committee) of the University
of Iowa (protocol code: 202110273 and date of approval: 15 March 2022).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
study.
Data Availability Statement: Data is available upon requests made to the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the review and comments regarding the survey from members
of Shields’ research lab including Sophia Ramaraju, Anjali Sanghvi, Nick Bernhagen, Kelsey Kincade,
DaLana Kron, Bennett Luedtke, Ashley Wehrenberg, and Jessica Williams. M.A.P . and K.A.J. provided
equal contributions to this paper with both worthy of ﬁrst authorship.
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 9 of 11
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
Appendix A
Exercise Recommendation Survey
 Q1 Do you offer exercise-related advice for patients with mild, moderate, or severe
blood glucose control issues?
#Yes (1)
#No (2)
 Skip To: Q8 If you offer exercise-related advice for patients with mild, moderate, or
severe blood glucose control issues
 Q2 If you advise your patients about exercise, what type of exercise do you typically
recommend? (Select All Answers that Apply)
Aerobic (Running, Biking, Swimming, Walking, Jogging, Other) (1)
Anaerobic (Resistance or Strength Training) (2)
General Physical Activity (Gardening, Golf, Other) (3)
None of the Above—Please Specify Below (4) _________________________________
 Q3 If you advise your patients about exercise, how many sessions per week do you
typically recommend?
#1 Session (1)
#>1 but 3 Sessions (2)
#>3 but 5 Sessions (3)
#>5 Sessions (4)
#I Do Not Specify the Number of Sessions (5)
 Q4 If you advise your patients about exercise, how many minutes per session do you
typically recommend?
#10–20 min (1)
#>20–30 min (2)
#>30–40 min (3)
#>40–60 min (4)
#>60 min (5)
#I Do Not Specify the Duration of Exercise Session (6)
 Q5 If you advise your patients about exercise, what time of the day do you typically
recommend?
#Morning (5)
#Noon (1)
#Evening (2)
#Anytime (3)
#I Do Not Recommend to Exercise at a Speciﬁc Time (4)
 Q6 If you advise your patients about exercise, do you typically recommend that they
exercise:
#Right Before Having a Meal (1)
#Immediately After Having a Meal (2)
#Greater than 1 Hour After a Meal (3)
#I Do Not Recommend Exercise Based on Time of a Meal (4)
 Q7 If you advise your patients about exercise, do you specify the intensity of the
exercise based on the heart rate?
#<50% Max Heart Rate (1)
#50–70% Max Heart Rate (2)
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 10 of 11
#>70% Max Heart Rate (3)
#I Do Not Specify the Intensity of Exercise Based on Heart Rate (4)
 Q8 Do you refer patients to a physical exercise specialist?
#Yes, Always (1)
#Sometimes (2)
#No, Never (3)
 Skip To: Q10 If Do you refer patients to a physical exercise specialist? = No, Never
 Q9 If you refer your patients to a physical exercise specialist, indicate which specialist
you refer them to: (Select All Answers that Apply)
Physical Therapist (1)
Personal Trainer/Exercise Physiologist (2)
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Physician (3)
None of the Above—Please Specify Below (4) _______________________________
 Q10 Do you consider yourself an active exerciser?
#Yes (1)
#No (2)
References
1. Elgaddal, N.K.; Ellen, A.; Reuben, C. Physical activity among adults aged 18 and over: United States 2020. NCHS Data Brief 2022 ,
443, 1–8.
2. Liang, Z.D.; Zhang, M.; Wang, C.Z.; Yuan, Y.; Liang, J.H. Association between sedentary behavior, physical activity, and
cardiovascular disease-related outcomes in adults-A meta-analysis and systematic review. Front. Public Health 2022 ,10, 1018460.
[CrossRef]
3. Hermelink, R.; Leitzmann, M.F.; Markozannes, G.; Tsilidis, K.; Pukrop, T.; Berger, F.; Baurecht, H.; Jochem, C. Sedentary behavior
and cancer-an umbrella review and meta-analysis. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2022 ,5, 447–460. [CrossRef]
4. Aune, D.; Norat, T.; Leitzmann, M.; Tonstad, S.; Vatten, L.J. Physical activity and the risk of type 2 diabetes: A systematic review
and dose-response meta-analysis. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2015 ,7, 529–542. [CrossRef]
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report. Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/
diabetes/data/statistics-report/index.html (accessed on 3 April 2023).
6. Raghavan, S.; Vassy, J.L.; Ho, Y.; Song, R.J.; Gagnon, D.R.; Cho, K.; Wilson, P .W.F.; Phillips, L.S. Diabetes Mellitus-Related
All-Cause and Cardiovascular Mortality in a National Cohort of Adults. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2019 ,4, e011295. [CrossRef]
7. Defronzo, R.A.; Banting, L. From the triumvirate to the ominous octet: A new paradigm for the treatment of type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Diabetes 2009 ,4, 773–795. [CrossRef]
8. American Diabetes Association. Economic Costs of Diabetes in the U.S. in 2017. Diabetes Care 2018 ,5, 917–928.
9. García-Hermoso, A.; Ram írez-V élez, R.; D íez, J.; Gonz ález, A.; Izquierdo, M. Exercise training-induced changes in exerkine
concentrations may be relevant to the metabolic control of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. J. Sport Health Sci. 2023 ,2, 147–157. [CrossRef]
10. Barbosa, A.; Whiting, S.; Ding, D.; Brito, J.; Mendes, R. Economic evaluation of physical activity interventions for type 2 diabetes
management: A systematic review. Eur. J. Public Health 2022 ,32(Suppl. 1), i56–i66. [CrossRef]
11. Barker, K.; Eickmeyer, S. Therapeutic Exercise. Med. Clin. N. Am. 2020 ,2, 189–198. [CrossRef]
12. Baskin, K.K.; Winders, B.R.; Olson, E.N. Muscle as a “mediator” of systemic metabolism. Cell Metab. 2015 ,2, 237–248. [CrossRef]
13. Huh, J.Y. The role of exercise-induced myokines in regulating metabolism. Arch. Pharm. Res. 2018 ,1, 14–29. [CrossRef]
14. Smith, J.A.B.; Murach, K.A.; Dyar, K.A.; Zierath, J.R. Exercise metabolism and adaptation in skeletal muscle. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 2023 . [CrossRef]
15. Schnyder, S.; Handschin, C. Skeletal muscle as an endocrine organ: PGC-1 , myokines and exercise. Bone 2015 ,80, 115–125.
[CrossRef]
16. Gillen, J.B.; Estafanos, S.; Govette, A. Exercise-nutrient interactions for improved postprandial glycemic control and insulin
sensitivity. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 2021 ,8, 856–865. [CrossRef]
17. Evans, P .L.; McMillin, S.L.; Weyrauch, L.A.; Witczak, C.A. Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Glucose Transport and Glucose
Metabolism by Exercise Training. Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2432. [CrossRef]
18. Merz, K.E.; Thurmond, D.C. Role of Skeletal Muscle in Insulin Resistance and Glucose Uptake. Compr. Physiol. 2020 ,3, 785–809.
19. Henriksen, E.J. Invited review: Effects of acute exercise and exercise training on insulin resistance. J. Appl. Physiol. 2002 ,2,
788–796. [CrossRef]
J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2023 ,8, 112 11 of 11
20. Kjøbsted, R.; Roll, J.L.W.; Jørgensen, N.O.; Birk, J.B.; Foretz, M.; Viollet, B.; Chadt, A.; Al-Hasani, H.; Wojtaszewski, J.F.P . AMPK
and TBC1D1 Regulate Muscle Glucose Uptake After, but Not During, Exercise and Contraction. Diabetes 2019 ,7, 1427–1440.
[CrossRef]
21. Klip, A.; McGraw, T.E.; James, D.E. Thirty sweet years of GLUT4. J. Biol. Chem. 2019 ,30, 11369–11381. [CrossRef]
22. Romeres, D.; Schiavon, M.; Basu, A.; Cobelli, C.; Basu, R.; Dalla Man, C. Exercise effect on insulin-dependent and insulin-
independent glucose utilization in healthy individuals and individuals with type 1 diabetes: A modeling study. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2021 ,1, e122–e129.
23. Flores-Opazo, M.; McGee, S.L.; Hargreaves, M. Exercise and GLUT4. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 2020 ,3, 110–118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Dankner, R.; Chetrit, A.; Shanik, M.; Raz, I.; Roth, J. Basal state hyperinsulinemia in healthy normoglycemic adults heralds
dysglycemia after more than two decades of follow up. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 2012 ,7, 618–624. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Tricò, D.; Natali, A.; Arslanian, S.; Mari, A.; Ferrannini, E. Identiﬁcation, pathophysiology, and clinical implications of primary
insulin hypersecretion in nondiabetic adults and adolescents. JCI Insight. 2018 ,3, e124912. [CrossRef]
26. Kanaley, J.A.; Colberg, S.R.; Corcoran, M.H.; Malin, S.K.; Rodriguez, N.R.; Crespo, C.J.; Kirwan, J.P .; Zierath, J.R. Exercise/Physical
Activity in Individuals with Type 2 Diabetes: A Consensus Statement from the American College of Sports Medicine. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 2022 ,2, 353–368. [CrossRef]
27. Davies, M.J.; Aroda, V .R.; Collins, B.S.; Gabbay, R.A.; Green, J.; Maruthur, N.M.; Rosas, S.E.; Del Prato, S.; Mathieu, C.; Mingrone,
G. Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes 2022. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and
the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia 2022 ,12, 1925–1966. [CrossRef]
28. Mendes, R.; Sousa, N.; Almeida, A.; Subtil, P .; Guedes-Marques, F.; Reis, V .M.; Themudo-Barata, J.L. Exercise prescription
for patients with type 2 diabetes-a synthesis of international recommendations: Narrative review. Br. J. Sports Med. 2016 ,22,
1379–1381. [CrossRef]
29. Bellini, A.; Nicol ò, A.; Bazzucchi, I.; Sacchetti, M. Effects of Different Exercise Strategies to Improve Postprandial Glycemia in
Healthy Individuals. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2021 ,7, 1334–1344. [CrossRef]
30. Engeroff, T.; Groneberg, D.A.; Wilke, J. After Dinner Rest a While, After Supper Walk a Mile? A Systematic Review with
Meta-analysis on the Acute Postprandial Glycemic Response to Exercise Before and After Meal Ingestion in Healthy Subjects and
Patients with Impaired Glucose Tolerance. Sports Med. 2023 ,4, 849–869. [CrossRef]
31. Sacchetti, M.; Haxhi, J.; Sgr ò, P .; di Palumbo, A.S.; Nicol ò, A.; Bellini, A.; Bazzucchi, I.; di Luigi, L. Effects of exercise before and/or
after a mixed lunch on postprandial metabolic responses in healthy male individuals. Eur. J. Nutr. 2021 ,6, 3437–3447. [CrossRef]
32. Petrie, M.A.; Kimball, A.L.; Shields, R.K. Acute Low Force Electrically Induced Exercise Modulates Post Prandial Glycemic
Markers in People with Spinal Cord Injury. J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2022 ,7, 89. [CrossRef]
33. Smith, A.W.; Borowski, L.A.; Liu, B.; Galuska, D.A.; Signore, C.; Klabunde, C.; Huang, T.T.-K.; Krebs-Smith, S.M.; Frank, E.; Pronk,
N.; et al. U.S. primary care physicians’ diet-, physical activity-, and weight-related care of adult patients. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2011 ,1,
33–42. [CrossRef]
34. Pozniak, A.; Olinger, L.; Shier, V . Physicians’ perceptions of reimbursement as a barrier to comprehensive diabetes care. Am.
Health Drug Beneﬁts 2010 ,1, 31–40.
35. Selvaraj, C.S.; Abdullah, N. Physically active primary care doctors are more likely to offer exercise counselling to patients with
cardiovascular diseases: A cross-sectional study. BMC Prim. Care 2022 ,1, 59.
36. Savikj, M.; Gabriel, B.M.; Alm, P .S.; Smith, J.; Caidahl, K.; Björnholm, M.; Fritz, T.; Krook, A.; Zierath, J.R.; Wallberg-Henriksson,
H. Afternoon exercise is more efﬁcacious than morning exercise at improving blood glucose levels in individuals with type 2
diabetes: A randomised crossover trial. Diabetologia 2019 ,2, 233–237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Mancilla, R.; Brouwers, B.; Schrauwen-Hinderling, V .B.; Hesselink, M.K.C.; Hoeks, J.; Schrauwen, P . Exercise training elicits
superior metabolic effects when performed in the afternoon compared to morning in metabolically compromised humans. Physiol.
Rep. 2021 ,24, e14669. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Masi, D.; Spoltore, M.E.; Rossetti, R.; Watanabe, M.; Tozzi, R.; Caputi, A.; Risi, R.; Balena, A.; Gandini, O.; Mariani, S.; et al. The
Inﬂuence of Ketone Bodies on Circadian Processes Regarding Appetite, Sleep and Hormone Release: A Systematic Review of the
Literature. Nutrients 2022 ,14, 1410. [CrossRef]
39. Vieira, T.K.B.; Le ão, M.J.d.R.; Pereira, L.X.; da Silva, L.C.A.; da Paz, B.B.P .; Ferreira, R.J.S.; Feitoza, C.C.; Duarte, A.K.F.; Rodrigues,
A.K.B.F.; de Queiroz, A.C.; et al. Correlation between circadian rhythm related genes, type 2 diabetes, and cancer: Insights from
metanalysis of transcriptomics data. Mol. Cell Endocrinol. 2021 ,526, 111214. [CrossRef]
40. Dranebois, S.; Lalanne-Mistrih, M.L.; Nacher, M.; Thelusme, L.; Deungoue, S.; Demar, M.; Dueymes, M.; Alsibai, K.D.; Sabbah,
N. Prescription of Physical Activity by General Practitioners in Type 2 Diabetes: Practice and Barriers in French Guiana. Front.
Endocrinol. 2021 ,12, 790326. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
