Received: August 12, 2021. Accepted: September 23, 2021
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Physical Therapy Association. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.comPTJ: Physical Therapy & Rehabilitation Journal | Physical Therapy , 2022;102:1 –2
https://doi.org/10.1093/ptj/pzab248
Advance access publication date November 1, 2021
Editorial
Precision Rehabilitation: How Lifelong Healthy Behaviors
Modulate Biology, Determine Health, and
Affect Populations
Most rehabilitation specialists will be familiar with the term
“personalized medicine,” which was coined in the 1990s to
capture the clinical promise of the Human Genome Project.1
By sequencing the human genome, we assumed that we would
unlock the biological foundations of health and disease,
enabling health care to move away from “one-size-fits-all”
therapies and toward “personalized” therapeutic strategiestailored specifically for each patient’s unique genotype.
Except it wasn’t that simple.
As described in this special series, biomedical science
quickly learned that our genetic blueprint does not always
determine our destiny . Although a person’s genetic inheritance
is fixed, the activity of their genome is biologically regulated
by everything they do and everything they experience in
their lifetime—as well as what their parents and grandpar-ents experienced. Everything that a person experiences—
from childhood stress, to educational opportunities, to
lifestyle habits—converges on their genetic code throughthe epigenome to influence health, disease, and quality of
life.
As this complex network of influences became apparent,
biomedical science adopted a new term: “precision medicine.”
According to the National Institutes of Health,
2this term
describes therapies that depend on a wide range of biomedicalinformation, including the original molecular, genomic, and
cellular components, but with clinical, behavioral, physiolog-
ical, and environmental parameters added.
Precision medicine casts a far wider net than an individual’s
genome and has significance to the field of rehabilitation.
Our chief therapeutic tools—movement, physical activity, andexercise—operate at multiple levels of this “precision” hierar-
chy, relying heavily on “how to change a behavior”to improve
a patient’s health.
The articles in this special series illustrate the intrinsic
power and challenges of a precision medicine approach in
rehabilitation:
• Shields and Dudley-Javoroski
3describe the biological
bridges between genetics, lifestyle, and sociobehav-ioral factors, advocating for greater attention to social
determinants of health and population-level influences
by embedding these concepts into the International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF)
model.
• Noah and Lynn Snyder-Mackler
4provide novel evidence
on how social stressors become “biologically embedded,”
yielding health-limiting changes in clinically importantphysiologic systems.• Severin et al
5show that rehabilitation specialists are ide-
ally positioned within the health care team to embracethe Healthy Living Model (HLM) and influence health
by screening and understanding our clients’ healthy living
behaviors.
• Magnusson and Rethorn
6share an important perspec-
tive regarding the placement of epigenetic and epige-
nomic insights within a population health framework tostrengthen the physical therapy profession’s understand-
ing of variations in health, to inform integrated action, and
to further support the physical therapist’s role in reducinghealth-related disparities.
• Petrie and Shields
7offer an illustration of genomic and
epigenetic research being used to develop a more precisephysical therapist intervention for people with spinal cord
injury.
While these articles point to possible vistas for the future
of rehabilitation, they also reveal the conundrum facing clini-
cians and patients alike. Will physical therapists of the future
be as well-versed in epigenetics and population-level public
health factors as they are in exercise prescription? This special
series provides the platform to open this important discussionas the American Physical Therapy Association’s Centennial
year closes and as we prepare for the next 100 years of success
in the physical therapy profession.
Richard K. Shields, PT , PhD, FAPTA1,*
1Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Science, Lucille and
Roy Carver College of Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
*Address all correspondence to Dr Shields at: richard-shields@uiowa.edu
References
1. The Human Genome Project. National Human Genome Research
Institute. National Institutes of Health Last updated: December 22,
2020. Accessed: October 12, 2021. https://www.genome.gov/huma
n-genome-project .
2. The Promise of Precision Medicine. NIH ...Turning Discovery Into
Health . National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health
& Human Services. Last reviewed: February 12, 2020. Accessed:October 12, 2021. https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-
turning-discovery-into-health/promise-precision-medicine .
3. Shields R, Dudley-Javoroski S. Epigenetics and the International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health model: bridgingnature, nurture, and patient-centered population health. Phys Ther .
2022;102:pzab247. https://doi.org/10.1093/ptj/pzab247 .Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab248/6413901 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

2 Editorial
4. Snyder-Mackler N, Snyder-Mackler L. Holistic rehabilitation: bio-
logical embedding of social adversity and its health implica-tions. Phys Ther . 2022;102:pzab245. https://doi.org/10.1093/ptj/
pzab245 .
5. Severin R, Sabbahi A, Arena R, Phillips SA. Precision medicine and
physical therapy: a healthy living medicine approach for the nextcentury. Phys Ther . 2022;102:pzab253. https://doi.org/10.1093/ptj/
pzab253 .6. Magnusson DM, Rethorn ZD. Strengthening population health
perspectives in physical therapist practice using epigenetics. Phys
Ther . 2022;102:pzab244. https://doi.org/10.1093/ptj/pzab244 .
7. Petrie M, Taylor E, Suneja M, Shields R. Genomic and epige-
nomic evaluation of electrically induced exercise in peoplewith spinal cord injury: application to precision rehabilita-tion. Phys Ther . 2022;102:pzab243. https://doi.org/10.1093/ptj/
pzab243 .Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab248/6413901 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

