Received: May 19, 2021. Revised: August 10, 2021. Accepted: September 23, 2021
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Physical Therapy Association. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.comPTJ: Physical Therapy & Rehabilitation Journal | Physical Therapy , 2022;102:1 –11
https://doi.org/10.1093/ptj/pzab247
Advance access publication date November 1, 2021
Perspective
Epigenetics and the International Classiﬁcation of
Functioning, Disability and Health Model: Bridging Nature,
Nurture, and Patient-Centered Population Health
Richard K. Shields, PT , PhD, FAPTA1,*, Shauna Dudley- Javoroski, PT, PhD1
1Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Science, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa, USA
*Address all correspondence to Dr Shields at: richard-shields@uiowa.edu
Epigenetic processes enable environmental inputs such as diet, exercise, and health behaviors to reversibly tag DNA with
chemical “marks” that increase or decrease the expression of an individual’s genetic template. Over time, epigenetic
adaptations enable the effects of healthy or unhealthy stresses to become stably expressed in the tissue of an organism,with important consequences for health and disease. New research indicates that seemingly non-biological factors such
as social stress, poverty, and childhood hardship initiate epigenetic adaptations in gene pathways that govern inﬂammation
and immunity, two of the greatest contributors to chronic diseases such as diabetes and obesity. Epigenetic processestherefore provide a biological bridge between the genome —an individual’s genetic inheritance —and the Social Determinants
of Health —the conditions in which they are born, grow, live, work, and age. This Perspective paper argues that physical
therapy clinicians, researchers, and educators can use the theoretical framework provided by the International Classiﬁcationof Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF model) to harmonize new discoveries from both public health research and
medically focused genomic research. The ICF model likewise captures the essential role played by physical activity and
exercise, which initiate powerful and widespread epigenetic adaptations that promote health and functioning. In this proposedframework, epigenetic processes transduce the effects of the social determinants of health and behaviors such as exercise
into stable biological adaptations that affect an individual’s daily activities and their participation in social roles. By harmonizing
“nature” and “nurture,” physical therapists can approach patient care with a more integrated perspective, capitalizing onnovel discoveries in precision medicine, rehabilitation science, and in population-level research. As the experts in physical
activity and exercise, physical therapists are ideally positioned to drive progress in the new era of patient-centered population
health care.
Keywords: DNA, Genomics, Precision Medicine, Precision Rehabilitation, RNA, Social Determinants of HealthDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

2 Epigenetics, ICF Model, and Population Health
Introduction
From its earliest days, physical therapy has endorsed a per-
sonalized, patient-centered approach. Astute clinicians have
always understood that the patient’s emotional state, familydynamics, work circumstances, genetic predisposition, and
daily sources of stress can either amplify or impede the
efficacy of our interventions. Because our fundamental tool ismovement (a behavioral intervention), we have always needed
to attend to psychosocial factors that affect behavior and
modulate pain. The movement strategies we prescribe requireengagement of the patient as a whole person in all their
complexity, creating an imperative for patient-centered care.
Public health research supports that our profession’s careful
attention to the conditions in which people are born, grow,
live, work, and age—the social determinants of health
1—
likely enhances our efficacy as clinicians. County-level studiesindicate that socioeconomic factors and behaviors account
for 30% to 50% of the variation observed in health out-
comes compared with just 16% attributable to medical care.
2
Other studies using this same population-level approach show
strong associations between a community’s level of physical
activity and the health outcomes they collectively experience.3
Although it is challenging to pinpoint the consequences of
social determinants of health at the level of the individual, they
are unquestionably part of the complete picture of physicaltherapy care.
4Moreover, the social determinants of health
play a central role in the International Classification of Func-
tioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) model,5a framework
for understanding health and disability used by health care
researchers and practitioners the world over, including physi-cal therapists ( Fig. 1 ).
Since the mid-20th century, medicine has rightfully inter-
preted that a person’s genetic makeup is fundamental todetermining their individual health trajectory. The ICF model,
on the other hand, does not explicitly conceptualize genetic
inheritance as a contributor to function and disability. Withthe advent of “big data” informatics capabilities, the health
care system has entered the precision health care era, in
which providers may soon select individualized treatments(drugs) that are optimized for each patient’s molecular genetic
signatures, social determinants of health, and disease state.
Despite the potential for precision-based health care to impactpopulation health, the pace of translation has been slow.
6
Perspectives advocating for a “precision” approach have onlyrecently appeared in the physical therapy literature.
7–10
In addition to this lag in translation, the term “precision
medicine” is occasionally confused with a related term, “per-
sonalized medicine.” Personalized medicine suggests that thekeys to health and disease can be revealed by fine-scale analy-
sis of individual genetic information without explicit attention
to the social determinants of health.
11This runs contrary
to public health research, which points to the relevance of
complex environmental interactions that operate far above
the level of the individual: across communities and evenacross cultures, with modifying influences from health care
delivery systems and cost. A healthy tension currently exists
between these 2 valid but seemingly dichotomous health careworldviews.
12This tension poses an important question: can
a contemporary understanding of biology help explain the
ways various ICF factors—including the social determinants
of health and behaviors such as exercise—influence each other
and thereby affect health? If environmental factors such asthe social determinants of health can modify gene expression,
then genomic and population health approaches represent a
continuum, not a dichotomy.
The bridge between genetics and the social determinants
of health is epigenetics, a collection of cellular processes that
enable an organism’s environment to regulate the expression
of its genetic template. Through the mediation of epigenetic
processes, the genome, lifestyle, and the social determinants of
health form a matrix whose interactions and mutual depen-dencies create a powerful etiologic framework for all health
care practitioners, including physical therapists. The most
important feature of epigenetic processes is that they aresensitive to the organism’s environment: the “nurture” half of
the nature/nurture dyad. The term “exposome” is sometimes
used to describe an organism’s environmental inputs, encom-passing “ ...life-course environmental exposures (including
lifestyle factors), from the prenatal period onwards.”
13The
exposome includes environmental factors such as pollutionand chemical exposure, physical activity and exercise, health
behaviors such as smoking, nutrition, the social determinants
of health (eg, poverty, social stress, poor health care access,discrimination), as well as factors within the body such as
the gut microbiome ( Fig. 2 ).
14The epigenome mediates the
effects of all these factors on the genome, serving as anintegrator by which the exposome regulates the output of
the genome. Importantly, the epigenome acts in a cumulative
fashion, amplifying and solidifying long-lasting exposomeinfluences into stable phenotypic traits. In the context of
rehabilitation care, movement interventions prescribed by a
physical therapist can potentially yield epigenetic adaptationsif they become long-term lifestyle behaviors.
The unique power of epigenetic processes is that environ-
mental stressors reversibly tag DNA with chemical “marks”that increase or decrease the expression of an individual’s
genes. This does not underplay the importance of an acquired
genetic pre-disposition. Epigenetic marks can be passed downwith each successive mitotic cell duplication, enabling the
effects of healthy or unhealthy stresses to become stably
expressed in the tissue of an organism. But because they
are reversible, epigenetic processes also create the poten-
tial for healthy stressors to mitigate the effects of earlieradverse events. As we will describe below, movement, physical
activity, and exercise, fundamental tools used by physical
therapists, are powerful epigenetic stressors that promote ahealthful gene expression profile in multiple body systems.
We predict that the progression of epigenetic research in the
coming decades will reveal the specific biologic mechanismsthat underlie the health-promoting effects of many activity-
based interventions, including community-focused interven-
tions that use behavioral approaches to improve the socialdeterminants of health. We also believe that by providing
a common biological currency between genomic and public
health research, epigenetic research may synergize discoveryin both fields.
For a physical therapist treating complex acquired non-
communicable diseases such as obesity, diabetes, dementia,and heart disease, understanding the influence of lifestyle
and environmental factors on health outcomes is essential
to patient-centered care. Likewise, these same lifestyle andenvironmental factors will affect the progression of diseaseswith known genetic etiologies, such as muscular dystrophy
and spina bifida. In both these scenarios, the therapeuticDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

Shields and Dudley-Javoroski 3
Figure 1. The ICF model. New discoveries in biology are helping to explain the ways that individual domains inﬂuence each other, culminating in function
or disability.
Figure 2. The 3 known epigenetic processes (lower left) modify the
output of the genome (the transcriptome) in response to a wide range of
inputs from the exposome. This has ramiﬁcations for the proteome,
metabolome, and so on.
advantages to be gained through consideration of environ-
mental factors are accompanied by the potential ethical peril
of “detect[ing] adverse exposures and conditions that requireresources beyond the scope of clinical care.”
15In addition,physical therapists who strive to use epigenetic mechanism-
based reasoning16to select interventions face a steep chal-
lenge to keep pace with the rapidly changing frontiers of
“-omics,” including genomics, epigenomics, proteomics, andmetabolomics.
The purpose of this Perspective paper is to describe a
harmonizing framework by which physical therapy clinicalcare can incorporate new discoveries from both public health
and genomic research, building on the foundation laid by
the ICF model. Key to this discussion will be new scientificevidence that the social determinants of health, experienced
by an individual as healthy or unhealthy stress, epigenetically
modify the expression of an individual’s genome in ways that
mediate health and disease states. Because physical therapists
are equipped to intervene at any level of the ICF model—biological response, lifestyle behaviors, health systems, and
society—they are uniquely suited to advance the frontiers of
precision health care.
A Brief History of Human Genomic Research
Although genetic contributions to disease were long knownfrom heredity studies, the first disease to be mapped to a
human chromosome was Huntington Disease in 1983.
17
It took a consortium of 58 research groups an additional
10 years to map the specific locus of the genetic defect in
thehuntingtin gene.18By the late 1980s, it had become clear
that more rapid progress could be achieved if a completemap of the entire human genome were available. On OctoberDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

4 Epigenetics, ICF Model, and Population Health
1, 1990, the National Institutes of Health and international
partners launched the Human Genome Project, biology’s first
large-scale, multi-national, collaborative research endeavor.19
The project’s goal was to sequence all 3 billion human base
pairs within 15 years. “Working draft” maps of chromosome
segments, combined with rapid technological advances,
dramatically reduced the time and personnel required to
find new disease genes. By 2001, a single laboratory using
a “working draft” for chromosome 7 was able to identifythe location of a tumor suppressor gene within a span of
several weeks.
20Comparable work to isolate huntingtin ,a s
mentioned above, took a decade of work by a multi-institutionconsortium.
21
On April 14, 2003, the National Human Genome Research
Institute (NHGRI) announced the completion of the humangenome map a full 2 years ahead of schedule. Multi-national
collaborative groups began to uncover the complex poly-
genic basis of lifestyle-based diseases such as diabetes andcardiovascular disease.
22As it became apparent that medicine
could someday incorporate genomic data into diagnosis and
treatment of disease—the dawn of personalized medicine—NHGRI began to heavily invest in the development of tech-
nologies to reduce the cost of gene sequencing and to build
the informatics capacity to manage large genomic datasets. In2008, an international research consortium launched the 1000
Genomes Project, an ambitious effort to completely map the
genomes of 1000 people worldwide. By 2015, technologicalprogress had made possible what was once unthinkable:
full genomic mapping of 1,000,000 individuals. In that year,
NIH launched the “All of Us” research program, a precisionmedicine initiative that aimed first to enhance knowledge of
the genetic basis of cancer and then to more widely study
other diseases.
23A major objective of this ongoing project
is to “reduce health care costs by matching the right person
with the right treatment the first time.”24By genotyping 1
million Americans and obtaining detailed information abouttheir lifestyle, environment, and health history, this initiative
is building the foundation for the era of precision health care.
The All of Us program and other large-scale genomic
studies facilitate a population-scale approach that mines
huge datasets for statistical correlations among diseasesand discrete combinations of genes. This approach is called
a Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS). In complex
disorders such as cardiovascular disease, “before the advent ofGWAS, genetic analysis focused on individual variants in can-
didate genes and generated often poorly reproducible results.
In contrast, GWAS can explore the genetic variability of theentire genome for association with any given phenotype.”
25
For example, GWAS has identified nearly 200 gene loci withsignificant associations to coronary artery disease.
25
As almost always occurs with scientific progress, new
discoveries add new complexity to the next generation of
research questions. It became clear early in the history ofgenomic research that “genes alone did not always determine
destiny.” Evidence accumulated for individuals who beat the
genetic odds, such as patients with a genetic predispositionfor cardiovascular disease who never developed the disease
phenotype. Or that the lifespan of a person with an acquired
genetic disease, such as muscular dystrophy, was prolongedin some and not others. It soon became clear that the next
frontier of discovery in health care would be the biological
factors that control the expression of the pre-determinedgenetic template within each human being.Epigenetics: Where DNA Meets the
Environment
The Human Genome Project revealed the puzzling fact that
only a tiny fraction (approximately 2%) of the human genome
encodes proteins. These DNA regions are transcribed to mes-
senger RNA (mRNA), which is then translated into the pro-teins that build and regulate every cell of every tissue ( Fig. 3A ).
We now know that our DNA contains vast regions that do
not code for proteins: 70,000 promoter regions that initiatethe transcription of genes; 400,000 enhancer regions for non-
contiguous genes; and copious nucleotide sequences that code
for RNA molecules but not for proteins.
26Once considered
“junk” DNA, these regions became prime candidates for
sites that regulate how genes are activated or deactivated.
The discovery that a damaged or healthy gene can either beepigenetically suppressed or promoted opens the door for new
strategies to modulate our “predetermined” genetic destiny.
A long-term NHGRI initiative called ENCODE (the Ency-
clopedia of DNA Elements)
27has laid the groundwork for
assigning molecular functions to non-protein coding DNA
segments, the plentiful epigenetic regulators of the protein-
coding genome. The project identified over 18,400 genes thatare transcribed into non-coding RNA molecules (ncRNAs).
28
Instead of moving to ribosomes to undergo translation intoproteins, as mRNA does, ncRNAs engage in an ever-growing
list of functions ( Fig. 3B ).
29,30They may serve as scaffolds on
which other molecules transiently join in order to carry outshared functions, or they may guide other molecules to DNA
sites that initiate gene transcription or place epigenetic marks.
Some types of ncRNAs serve as decoys for transcriptionfactors, preventing them from interacting with genes to initiate
mRNA transcription. Importantly, some types of ncRNA can
be released to systemic circulation via extracellular vesicles,enabling them to travel to distant target organs to carry out
wide-ranging regulatory activities ( Fig. 3C ).
The ENCODE project mapped DNA regions that can be
“tagged” (marked) by methyl chemical groups, which gen-erally indicate that the associated genes have been silenced
(not transcribed to mRNA). ENCODE also cataloged patterns
of chemical modifications to histone proteins, the structuralmolecules that help package DNA into chromosomes. These
histone modification sections signified DNA regions that had
either been silenced or amplified, depending on the gene.These 3 features of DNA that are not themselves genes—
ncRNA, methylation sites, and histone modifications—are the
key factors that appear to regulate and coordinate DNA tran-scription/translation to proteins. Because these elements lie
outside the genome, they have been termed the “epigenome.”
The discovery of these controlling elements, the epigenome, inno way diminishes the importance of the human genome. The
genome and epigenome are intricately entwined by bringing
to the forefront the biological importance of “nature” and“nurture.”
Epigenetics initially gained public attention
31after rodent
studies revealed surprising evidence that noxious stress,
including social stress, experienced by both the dam andthe sire can yield transgenerational epigenetic differences in
offspring.
32,33This does not constitute a mutation, which
is an alteration in the DNA base-pair sequence. Rather,these studies raised the thought-provoking possibility that
environmental stressors, including what seemingly was
construed as non-biological factors such as social stress,Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

Shields and Dudley-Javoroski 5
Figure 3. (A) The majority of the genome is untranslated (approximately 28%: promotor and enhancer regions) or encodes non-coding RNA
(approximately 70%). Only approximately 2% encodes information for producing proteins. (B) A few of the newly discovered functions of non-codingRNA are “SCAFFOLD”: long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) serves as a scaffold on which 2 or more factors connect and carry out a shared function, such as
epigenetic modiﬁcation; “GUIDE”: lncRNA guides other elements to DNA to carry out a function such as gene transcription; and “DECOY”: lncRNA acts
as a decoy to block molecular interactions, such as between transcription factors (TF) and their target genes. (C) Micro-RNAs (miRNA) and lncRNA are
packaged into extracellular vesicles (exosomes) and released into the circulation where they travel to target cells in distant tissues. There, they exert
regulatory effects on the genome and epigenome.
can yield biochemical adaptations that reverberate across
generations. As we learn more about the non-coding regions
of the human genome, we predict that the capacity to measuretransgenerational epigenetic regulation will be enhanced. For
example, recently a child and his mother showed maternallyinherited epigenetic silencing of a damaged gene associated
with Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy,
34opening the door
for new therapeutics. Moreover, newborns of parents withobesity, considered an environmental stress, showed different
methylation signatures than infants born to parents withDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

6 Epigenetics, ICF Model, and Population Health
Figure 4. Centers for Disease Control categories and descriptors of the social determinants of health. Adapted from https://www.cdc.gov/socialdetermi
nants/index.htm .
normal weight.35Transgenerational epigenetic research in
humans is just beginning but may someday create powerful
mechanistic connections between population-level publichealth research and precision health care.
For physical therapists practicing today, the most impor-
tant epigenetic adaptations are those that yield gene reg-ulation changes within the lifespan of an individual. Both
healthful and noxious stresses experienced by an individual
trigger epigenetic changes in their tissues, which, throughmitotic cell division, are perpetuated in future generations of
that individual’s cells, tissues, and organs. If these epigenetic
changes are maintained long term, the phenotype of theirtissues may skew toward healthful or diseased states. Just
as importantly, the potential reversibility of some epigenetic
adaptations opens the door for health-promoting interven-tions that can remove epigenetic marks applied by exposure
to prior noxious stressors. An intense search is underway for
epigenetically modifiable DNA loci that are responsible forthe long-term adaptations to exercise and healthy lifestyle
behaviors.
Epigenetics as a T ransducer of Social Stress
Figure 4 illustrates the wide variety of environmental factors
that comprise the social determinants of health.36In the
past decade, evidence has begun to accumulate that these
factors, experienced by humans as positive or negative stress,
epigenetically alter gene transcription pathways in ways thatyield stable tissue and systems-level adaptations with direct
consequences for health and disease.
In a large Italian cohort, childhood socio-economic status
(SES) correlated with differential epigenetic tagging (methy-
lation) of several genes involved in inflammation.
37Systemic
inflammation plays a key role in many non-communicablediseases of adulthood, particularly cardiovascular disease,
metabolic syndrome/diabetes, and osteoarthritis. Childhood
epigenetic modification in response to social stress, if itdid indeed promote inflammation in adulthood, could be a
“smoking gun”helping to explain the differential rates of non-
communicable diseases observed across the SES continuum.However, few studies have linked SES-related epigeneticmethylation differences to clinical measures of inflammation,
a key requirement to demonstrate any potential functionalsignificance of epigenetic adaptations.
To date, the study that most convincingly addressed this
question accessed detailed childhood SES data from a publichealth study in the Philippines.
38Researchers obtained new
blood samples from the study participants, now all young
adults, and determined that childhood environmental stres-sors (nutritional, microbial, psychosocial) yielded differential
methylation of 10 DNA sites across 9 genes that regulate
inflammation. To confirm that these epigenetic differences
carried functional consequences, the researchers assayed sev-
eral biomarkers of inflammation, determining that 4 of themethylation sites did indeed correlate with adulthood levels
of inflammation. These results provide new evidence that
the inflammation cascade may be a key system in humansthat is epigenetically regulated by the social determinants of
health. They are consistent with a growing body of work
39–41
suggesting that infancy and childhood are a sensitive period
during which social and environmental stressors can be trans-
duced by epigenetic processes into persistent biological adap-
tations, often described as “biological embedding.”42,43Early
biological embedding of social stress also appears to under-
lie differential methylation of genes that regulate immune
function in adults, with potential consequences for pathogenresistance and exacerbation of systemic inflammation.
40,44
This insight is vital as we negotiate the challenges of the
COVID-19 pandemic, which has demonstrated high mortalityin adults with immune compromise
45,46and in groups com-
monly exposed to social stress.47
Additional “adaptive calibration of the DNA methy-
lome”40after early childhood social stress occurs within
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. The HPA
axis governs the production of glucocorticoid (GC) stresshormones, which play key signaling roles in the physiologic
processes that regulate both inflammation and immune
function. Malfunction of the HPA axis is implicated inmajor depressive disorder, chronic pain syndromes, cardio-
vascular disease, metabolic syndrome, and many other non-
communicable diseases.
48–50Primate studies using rhesus
macaques, which have highly stratified social groups, showed
that low-status individuals experienced epigenetic changesDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

Shields and Dudley-Javoroski 7
that favored transcription of inflammatory genes.51High-
status individuals showed different epigenetic changes thatfavored transcription of anti-inflammatory genes. Epigenetic
differences between social classes diminished in animals
receiving GC drugs, supporting that the effect was mediatedby the HPA axis. Numerous clinical physiology studies have
reported associations between social stress and elevated
GC levels and/or GC resistance.
52,53Epigenetic response
to social stress in humans is complex and appears to be
dependent on genotype and to be subject to stochastic
(random) effects.54However, epigenetic regulation of genes
governing the HPA axis could play a role in transducing
social stress, as demonstrated in the primate study above,51
perhaps playing a role in diseases that are differentially borne
across sociodemographic groups, such as the especially high
rates of chronic pain55and COVID-19 mortality47among
African Americans. Precision medicine of the future will morethan likely focus on epigenetic adaptations to social stress
in addition to the inter-individual differences in inherited
genes.
56Epigenetics may empower us to discover the key
relationships among the patient’s genome, environment,
prenatal exposure, and disease risk in time to prevent disease
development or secondary chronic co-morbidities.56
Movement, Physical Activity, and Exercise as
Epigenetic Regulators
A key question facing precision health care is whether epige-
netic adaptations that are biologically embedded in childhood
can be reversed by health-promoting behaviors later in life.Fortunately, a wealth of new studies suggest that movement,
physical activity, and exercise are powerful “epigenetic inter-
ventions” that can circumvent or prevent the development ofchronic disease. For physical therapists, the coming decades
will reveal many new ways that activity-based therapies can
improve health and longevity by triggering epigenetic adapta-tions.
At present, we have a very limited understanding of the
specific epigenetic adaptations that occur in response to
unhealthy environmental stressors such as sedentary lifestyle,
overfeeding, and social stress. It is therefore difficult todetermine whether the salutary effects of movement, physical
activity, and exercise remove these negative adaptations or
whether they initiate a different set of healthful epigeneticresponses. “Epigenome-wide association studies” are now
underway to identify specific DNA segments whose epigenetic
status differs in, for example, sedentary individuals versusthose who habitually engage in physical activity.
57One
such study examined 850,000 potential DNA methylation
loci in human skeletal muscle, showing hypomethylation of>9000 sites after resistance training.
58(Removal of methyl
groups would remove a “block” to DNA transcription
and would therefore facilitate expression of these DNAsequences.) After engaging in prescribed resistance training
that resulted in hypertrophy, participants ceased training and
muscle mass returned to baseline levels. But on resumptionof resistance training, 4 genes demonstrated even stronger
hypomethylation and consequent gene up-regulation than
had previously occurred during the initial training period.This provides the first compelling evidence for an epigenetic
“memory” for training in human skeletal muscle. Although
more investigation is needed, known functions of these 4genes include skeletal muscle cell differentiation and repair,processes that would be essential in any adaptive response
to exercise. Studies such as this have begun to reveal the
fundamental biological processes that activity and exercise
harness, underscoring the summative power of repeated, long-term exposure to activity-based stresses. Future discoveries
could have prognostic value for physical therapy care. For
instance, understanding a patient’s methylation status at key
DNA loci that direct activity-based adaptations
59could help
clinicians identify individuals who may be late responders ornon-responders to exercise-based interventions.
7Armed with
this knowledge, clinicians may craft precision rehabilitation
plans that sidestep less fruitful interventions and prioritizealternatives with a greater potential to elicit desired adapta-
tions.
Beyond skeletal muscle, new research is also revealing the
broader ways that physical activity and exercise training elicit
epigenetic adaptations in key body systems. Additional details
about the various exercise protocols (mode, dose, intensity)can be found in several recent reviews.
8,60–64Briefly, evidence
is amassing that the “gene–environment networks”61that
control glucose and energy homeostasis—and play a rolein metabolic disease and type-2 diabetes—are epigenetically
regulated by exercise. In skeletal muscle, exercise appears
to epigenetically enhance the ability of insulin to “open thedoor” for glucose to enter the working cell. When activated
by insulin, the insulin receptor at the muscle cell’s surface
interacts with a chain of many other intra-cellular proteins(kinases) that create a channel through which glucose can be
transported down its concentration gradient. Clinical stud-
ies are underway to determine what role epigenetic adapta-tions in insulin-mediated glucose transport play in the well-
substantiated ability of physical activity and exercise to regu-
late glucose and insulin and prevent metabolic disease.
Exercise also appears to trigger other types of epigenetic
changes in the systems that prevent metabolic disease. Exercise
triggers widespread epigenetic changes (hypomethylation)across the skeletal muscle genome, notably in the gene
PPARGC1A , which encodes a protein called PGC1 α.
65
PGC1 αis a master transcription factor that coordinates
metabolic adaptations to exercise by initiating the transcrip-
tion of a host of downstream pathways, including some in thebrain.
66Its widespread effects on genes in multiple physiologic
systems makes PGC1 αa critical gene for transducing physical
exercise into organism-wide metabolic and cognitive healthadaptations.
66,67As would be expected, PGC1 αis hyper-
methylated in type-2 diabetes, signifying that its transcription
is repressed and its downstream effects are blunted in theseindividuals.
65We recently reported that even in people with
spinal cord injury who cannot engage in lower extremity
voluntary exercise, demethylation of PGC1 αcan be achieved
by chronic doses of electrically induced muscle exercise.68We
are working to determine whether these epigenetic changes are
accompanied by transcriptional adaptations in downstreampathways that regulate glucose and insulin homeostasis, and
whether these adaptations yield improvements in clinically
important biomarkers of metabolic health.
Exercise Dose and Epigenetic Adaptations
A key theme that we predict will emerge in future stud-
ies is that epigenetic change, while initiated rapidly by a
single exercise bout, requires time and repeated exposures to“develop a memory.” Especially in human research, a majorDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

8 Epigenetics, ICF Model, and Population Health
Figure 5. Epigenetic processes (EP) may biologically mediate the interrelationships among several International Classiﬁcation of Functioning, Disabilit y,
and Health (ICF) domains. Activities (eg, exercise), environmental factors (eg, social determinants of health) and personal factors (eg, smoking, alcohol
abuse) may yield epigenetic adaptations of tissues that culminate in positive or negative outcomes in body functions or structures.
unknown variable is how long a behavioral intervention must
be maintained before epigenetic adaptation becomes stable.
For example, epigenetic changes induced by the brief negative
environmental stress of a 5-day high-fat diet did not resolveeven after 6 weeks of resumption of a healthy diet.
69This
potential lag in reversing epigenetic adaptations increases the
difficulty of measuring the time course for consolidation ofepigenetic benefits of new activity or behavior-based inter-
ventions. We recently demonstrated that very long durations
of electrically induced exercise were required to maximallypromote genes in paralyzed muscle that had been repressed
after long periods of chronic disuse.
68Although all signs
indicate that movement, physical activity, and exercise arepowerful epigenetic environmental regulators, we predict that
future studies will unequivocally show that exercise must be
recommended to clients as a lifestyle-based intervention, notas a 6- to 12-week quick fix. Although such short intervention
durations are typical in exercise studies and clinical episodes
of care, researchers and clinicians should have realistic expec-tations for the likely pace of epigenetic change.
ICF Model and Epigenetics
A central theme of this perspective is that epigenetics is a mul-timodal, temporal integrator of exposome stimuli that offersa biological bridge between nature and nurture, between an
organism’s outer and inner worlds. From a broader health
care perspective, epigenetic processes may also provide amechanistic link among the many interrelated domains of the
ICF. This theoretical framework and classification tool pro-
vides clinicians and researchers with a standard language todescribe disability and function.
5Rather than the traditional
“medical model,” which considers disability to be a linear
consequence of biological disease processes, the ICF modelfacilitates a more coherent view of function and disabilitythat places social, behavioral, environmental, and personal
factors on an equal footing with biological change. In the
ICF framework, the social determinants of health typically
exert their effects on function via the domain “environmentalfactors” ( Fig. 5 ). Although biological factors are typically
presumed to exert their effects through the domain “body
functions/structures,” the ICF classification system currentlydoes not include coding designations for genetic or epigenetic
signatures. We propose that inherited as well as acquired epi-
genetic signatures can be conceptualized as mediators of theinteractions between several ICF domains. Figure 5 illustrates
potential ways that epigenetic processes may mechanistically
link environmental and behavioral ICF domains to affectan individual’s biological systems and overall expression of
function or disability. This theoretical framework may be
useful to academic physical therapy programs that emphasizethe ICF model in their curricula but that are looking for
ways to enhance content relating to medical genetics. In
the future, precision rehabilitation will certainly respect theimportance of genetic inheritance (a potential “personal fac-
tors” trait; Fig. 5 ) but need to understand the environmentally
and behaviorally relevant epigenetic processes that affect bodytissues.
Figure 6 depicts an example of how the ICF model can cap-
ture the ways that the social determinants of health (environ-mental factors), health-related personal factors, and regular
exercise (activities) can all affect the experience of disability
and functioning for a patient with type 2 diabetes. Epigenetic
processes may transduce the effects of pervasive environmen-
tal and behavioral stressors and initiate biological adapta-tions such as impaired glucose metabolism (body functions
and structures domain). These biological adaptations may
exacerbate the underlying health condition and undermine anindividual’s ability to carry out daily activities and participate
in social roles.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

Shields and Dudley-Javoroski 9
Figure 6. Example of International Classiﬁcation of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) qualiﬁers that can be used to characterize disability and
functioning for a patient with Type 2 diabetes. Epigenetic processes (EP) likely transduce the effects of environmental, personal, and behavioral ( activity)
factors into tissue-level adaptations that culminate in changes in body structures and function. These changes may, in turn, exacerbate the underly ing
health condition and trigger further limitations in activities and participation.
Epigenetics and Patient-Centered Physical
Therapy
In this Perspective, we link the burgeoning fields of genomics
and epigenomics with the social determinants of health and
exercise-based behaviors within the ICF model. Short term, we
envision that embedding genetics and epigenetics within theICF theoretical framework will promote a broader academic
understanding of the complex interactions among personal
predisposing factors, social/environmental factors, and bio-logic adaptation as it relates to physical therapist exercise-
based interventions.
Long term, we envision that genomic/epigenomic, personal,
and environmental factors will be predictive of responders or
non-responders to our exercise interventions, assisting us indeveloping sound guidelines and more precise preventative
treatments. We also envision that artificial intelligence algo-
rithms will someday play a pivotal role in developing moreprecise practice guidelines by using personalized data about
lifestyle as well as genetic/epigenetic molecular signatures,
similar to drug selection, interaction, and delivery programsin medicine today.
70
Several recent studies linking epigenetics to activity, behav-
ior, and the environment can help to illustrate where futureexpansion may occur in physical therapy theory and practice.
Four examples of recent papers and the implication to physical
therapist practice are offered.
First, excessive alcohol consumption triggers epigenetic
effects that are directly opposite to those observed after
exercise.
71In light of this finding, do physical therapists
routinely query clients about alcohol consumption and
consider this social behavior when prescribing a dose of
exercise?
Second, epigenetic regulation of 3 metabolic genes is
affected by sleep duration and quality in a sex-dependentmanner.72Do physical therapists routinely consider sleep
habits of a client before prescribing an exercise program,
and do they consider how sleep may influence the probability
of inducing a true behavioral change?
Third, in muscle cell culture, transcription of certain genes
relating to metabolism and development are fine-tuned by epi-
genetic mechanisms that respond to an individual’s circadianrythmn.
73Do physical therapists optimize the time of day for
a client to exercise, according to their own biological clocks,
to promote adaptation, compliance, and ultimately a change
in behavior?
Lastly, skeletal muscle has been shown to be a key epige-
netic predictor of a person’s overall “true” biological age.74
Do physical therapists consider the biological age versus thechronological age of a client and adjust the prescribed exercisedose accordingly?
Although many physical therapists intuitively consider
these factors as part of their routine clinical reasoningprocess, the underlying biological framework supporting their
approach continues to evolve. Importantly, patient-centered
care requires that we more comprehensively understand thesocial, environmental, and biological context for each client
so that we can prevent disease and improve the probability
that our treatment will be successful.
Conclusions
For physical therapy clinicians today, epigenetic discoveries
about social determinants of health and lifestyle (exercise
and physical activity) may seem far removed from immediatedecisions concerning intervention selection and dose pre-
scription. But more actionable discoveries are approaching
quickly, and it is time for all health care professions toprepare to capitalize on this new science. We do not need toDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

10 Epigenetics, ICF Model, and Population Health
reinvent the wheel. The ICF model gains mechanistic power
by expanding to include epigenetic processes, and it already
emphasizes the social determinants of health, a factor that
deserves greater formal integration into physical therapy care.Academic programs and clinicians can leverage the power of
the ICF model to prepare the next generation of therapists to
integrate genomic and epigenomic insights, attention to social
factors, and an expert understanding of activity into precision
rehabilitation care that yields enhanced patient outcomes andreduced costs. Precision medicine was once conceptually lim-
ited to genomics but now strives to incorporate environmental
and behavioral factors,
75as shown by the All of Us research
program.24As the experts in physical activity and exercise,
physical therapists must engage to drive progress in precision
health care.
Author Contributions
Concept/idea/research design: R.K. Shields
Writing: R.K. Shields, S. Dudley-JavoroskiProject management: R.K. ShieldsFund procurement: R.K. ShieldsProviding facilities/equipment: R.K. ShieldsClerical/secretarial support: R.K. ShieldsConsultation (including review of manuscript before submitting):
R.K. Shields
Funding
Research findings presented in this study were funded by NationalCenter for Medical Rehabilitation Research grants R01HD-084645and RO1HD-082109 to R.K. Shields. The funders played no role inthe writing of this Perspective.
Disclosures
The authors completed the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of PotentialConflicts of Interest and reported no conflicts of interest.
References
1. World Health Organization. Social determinants of health . 2020.
Accessed July 28, 2020. https://www.who.int/social_determinants/
sdh_definition/en/ .
2. Hood CM, Gennuso KP, Swain GR, Catlin BB. County health
rankings: relationships between determinant factors and healthoutcomes. Am J Prev Med . 2016;50:129–135.
3. Sato M, Du J, Inoue Y. Rate of physical activity and com-
munity health: evidence from U.S. counties. J Phys Act Health .
2016;13:640–648.
4. Rethorn ZD, Cook C, Reneker JC. Social determinants of health:
if you aren’t measuring them, you aren’t seeing the big picture. J
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2019;49:872–874.
5. World Health Organization. International Classification of Func-
tioning, Disability and Health (ICF) . 2020. Accessed July 28, 2020.
https://www.who.int/classifications/icf/en/ .
6. Allen CG, Peterson S, Khoury MJ, Brody LC, McBride CM. A scop-
ing review of social and behavioral science research to translategenomic discoveries into population health impact. Transl Behav
Med. 2021;11:901–911.
7. Shields RK. 48th Mary McMillan lecture: turning over the hour-
glass. Phys Ther . 2017;97:949–963.
8. Woelfel JR, Dudley-Javoroski S, Shields RK. Precision physical
therapy: exercise, the epigenome, and the heritability of environ-mentally modified traits. Phys Ther . 2018;98:946–952.9. Chimenti RL, Frey-Law LA, Sluka KA. A mechanism-based
approach to physical therapist management of pain. Phys Ther .
2018;98:302–314.
10. Magnusson DM, Eisenhart M, Gorman I, Kennedy VK, Davenport
TE. Adopting population health frameworks in physical therapistpractice, research, and education: the urgency of now. Phys Ther .
2019;99:1039–1047.
11. Ferryman K, Pitcan M. What is Precision Medicine . Washington,
DC, USA: Data and Society Research Institute; 2018.
12. Horesh Bergquist S, Lobelo F. The limits and potential future
applications of personalized medicine to prevent complex chronic
disease. Public Health Rep . 2018;133:519–522.
13. Wild CP. Complementing the genome with an "exposome": the
outstanding challenge of environmental exposure measurementin molecular epidemiology. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev .
2005;14:1847–1850.
14. Miller GW, Jones DP. The nature of nurture: refining the definition
of the exposome. Toxicol Sci . 2014;137:1–2.
15. Garg A, Boynton-Jarrett R, Dworkin PH. Avoiding the unintended
consequences of screening for social determinants of health. JAMA .
2016;316:813–814.
16. Polli A, Nijs J, Ickmans K, Velkeniers B, Godderis L. Linking
lifestyle lactors to complex pain states: 3 reasons why understand-ing epigenetics may improve the delivery of patient-centered care.J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2019;49:683–687.
17. Gusella JF, Wexler NS, Conneally PM, et al. A polymorphic
DNA marker genetically linked to Huntington’s disease. Nature .
1983;306:234–238.
18. MacDonald ME, Ambrose CM, Duyao MP, et al. A novel gene
containing a trinucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable onHuntington’s disease chromosomes. Cell. 1993; 971–983.
19. Green ED, Watson JD, Collins FS. Human genome project: twenty-
five years of big biology. Nature . 2015;526:29–31.
20. Zenklusen JC, Conti CJ, Green ED. Mutational and functional
analyses reveal that ST7 is a highly conserved tumor-suppressorgene on human chromosome 7q31. Nat Genet . 2001;27:
392–398.
21. National Human Genome Research Institute. NHGRI history and
timeline of events . Accessed July 29, 2020. https://www.genome.go
v/about-nhgri/Brief-History-Timeline .
22. Scott LJ, Mohlke KL, Bonnycastle LL, et al. A genome-wide
association study of type 2 diabetes in Finns detects multiplesusceptibility variants. Science . 2007;316:1341–1345.
23. Collins FS, Varmus H. A new initiative on precision medicine. N
Engl J Med . 2015;372:793–795.
24. National Institutues of Health All of Us Research Program. All
of Us Research Program overview . 2020. Accessed July 29, 2020.
https://allofus.nih.gov/about/all-us-research-program-overview .
25. Schunkert H, Samani NJ. Into the great wide open: 10 years
of genome-wide association studies. Cardiovasc Res . 2018;
114:1189–1191.
26. Maher B. ENCODE: the human encyclopaedia. Nature . 2012;
489:46–48.
27. National Human Genome Research Institute. The Encyclo-
pedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) . 2020. Accessed July
29, 2020. https://www.genome.gov/Funded-Programs-Projects/E
NCODE-Project-ENCyclopedia-Of-DNA-Elements .
28. Pennisi E. Genomics. ENCODE project writes eulogy for junk
DNA. Science . 2012;337:1159–1161.
29. Balas MM, Johnson AM. Exploring the mechanisms behind long
noncoding RNAs and cancer. Noncoding RNA Res . 2018;3:
108–117.
30. Kaikkonen MU, Lam MT, Glass CK. Non-coding RNAs as
regulators of gene expression and epigenetics. Cardiovasc Res .
2011;90:430–440.
31. Cloud J. Why DNA isn’t your destiny. Time . 2010;18.
32. Blewitt M, Whitelaw E. The use of mouse models to study epige-
netics. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2013;5:a017939.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

Shields and Dudley-Javoroski 11
33. Cunningham AM, Walker DM, Nestler EJ. Paternal transgen-
erational epigenetic mechanisms mediating stress phenotypes ofoffspring. Eur J Neurosci . 2021;53:271–280.
34. Martone J, Lisi M, Castagnetti F, et al. Trans-generational epi-
genetic regulation associated with the amelioration of Duchennemuscular dystrophy. EMBO Mol Med . 2020;5:e12063.
35. Soubry A, Murphy SK, Wang F, et al. Newborns of obese parents
have altered DNA methylation patterns at imprinted genes. Int J
Obes . 2015;39:650–657.
36. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy peo-
ple 2030 - social determinants of health . 2020. Accessed November
16, 2020. https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/so
cial-determinants-health .
37. Stringhini S, Polidoro S, Sacerdote C, et al. Life-course socioeco-
nomic status and DNA methylation of genes regulating inflamma-tion. Int J Epidemiol . 2015;44:1320–1330.
38. McDade TW, Ryan C, Jones MJ, et al. Social and physical
environments early in development predict DNA methylation ofinflammatory genes in young adulthood. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2017;114:7611–7616.
39. Alfano R, Guida F, Galobardes B, et al. Socioeconomic posi-
tion during pregnancy and DNA methylation signatures at threestages across early life: epigenome-wide association studies in theALSPAC birth cohort. Int J Epidemiol . 2019;48:30–44.
40. Bush NR, Edgar RD, Park M, et al. The biological embedding
of early-life socioeconomic status and family adversity in chil-dren’s genome-wide DNA methylation. Epigenomics . 2018;10:
1445–1461.
41. Needham BL, Smith JA, Zhao W, et al. Life course socioeconomic
status and DNA methylation in genes related to stress reactivityand inflammation: the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Epi-
genetics . 2015;10:958–969.
42. Hertzman C. Putting the concept of biological embedding in
historical perspective. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2012;109:
17160–17167.
43. Demetriou CA, van Veldhoven K, Relton C, Stringhini S, Kyriacou
K, Vineis P. Biological embedding of early-life exposures and
disease risk in humans: a role for DNA methylation. Eur J Clin
Invest . 2015;45:303–332.
44. Austin MK, Chen E, Ross KM, et al. Early-life socioeconomic
disadvantage, not current, predicts accelerated epigenetic aging ofmonocytes. Psychoneuroendocrinology . 2018;97:131–134.
45. Holuka C, Merz MP, Fernandes SB, et al. The COVID-19 pan-
demic: does our early life environment, life trajectory and socioe-conomic status determine disease susceptibility and severity? Int J
Mol Sci . 2020;21:5094.
46. Salimi S, Hamlyn JM. COVID-19 and crosstalk with the hallmarks
of aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 2020;75:e34–e41.
47. Maroko AR, Nash D, Pavilonis BT. COVID-19 and inequity: a
comparative spatial analysis of New York City and Chicago hotspots. J Urban Health . 2020;97:461–470.
48. Cernackova A, Durackova Z, Trebaticka J, Mravec B. Neuroin-
flammation and depressive disorder: the role of the hypothalamus.J Clin Neurosci . 2020;75:5–10.
49. Rahman MH, Bhusal A, Lee WH, Lee IK, Suk K. Hypothalamic
inflammation and malfunctioning glia in the pathophysiology ofobesity and diabetes: translational significance. Biochem Pharma-
col. 2018;153:123–133.
50. Nees F, Loffler M, Usai K, Flor H. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis feedback sensitivity in different states of back pain. Psy-
choneuroendocrinology . 2019;101:60–66.
51. Snyder-Mackler N, Sanz J, Kohn JN, et al. Social status alters
chromatin accessibility and the gene regulatory response to glu-cocorticoid stimulation in rhesus macaques. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
SA. 2019;116:1219–1228.
52. Miller GE, Cohen S, Ritchey AK. Chronic psychological stress and
the regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines: a glucocorticoid-resistance model. Health Psychol . 2002;21:531–541.53. Walsh CP, Ewing LJ, Cleary JL, et al. Development of glucocor-
ticoid resistance over one year among mothers of children newlydiagnosed with cancer. Brain Behav Immun . 2018;69:364–373.
54. Matthews SG, McGowan PO. Developmental programming of
the HPA axis and related behaviours: epigenetic mechanisms. J
Endocrinol . 2019;242:T69–T79.
55. Aroke EN, Joseph PV, Roy A, et al. Could epigenetics help explain
racial disparities in chronic pain? JP a i nR e s . 2019;12:701–710.
56. Feinberg AP. The key role of epigenetics in human disease preven-
tion and mitigation. NE n g lJM e d . 2018;378:1323–1334.
57. Fernandez-Sanles A, Sayols-Baixeras S, Castro DEMM, et al. Phys-
ical activity and genome-wide DNA methylation: the REgistre
GIroni del COR study. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2020;52:589–597.
58. Seaborne RA, Strauss J, Cocks M, et al. Human skeletal muscle pos-
sesses an epigenetic memory of hypertrophy. Sci Rep . 2018;8:1898.
59. Hibler E, Huang L, Andrade J, Spring B. Impact of a diet and
activity health promotion intervention on regional patterns ofDNA methylation. Clin Epigenetics . 2019;11:133.
60. Zimmer P, Bloch W. Physical exercise and epigenetic adaptations
of the cardiovascular system. Herz . 2015;40:353–360.
61. Barres R, Zierath JR. The role of diet and exercise in the trans-
generational epigenetic landscape of T2DM. Nat Rev Endocrinol .
2016;12:441–451.
62. Grazioli E, Dimauro I, Mercatelli N, et al. Physical activity in the
prevention of human diseases: role of epigenetic modifications.BMC Genomics . 2017;18:802.
63. Fernandes J, Arida RM, Gomez-Pinilla F. Physical exercise as an
epigenetic modulator of brain plasticity and cognition. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev . 2017;80:443–456.
64. Beiter T, Niess AM, Moser D. Transcriptional memory in skele-
tal muscle. Don’t forget (to) exercise. JC e l lP h y s i o l . 2020;235:
5476–5489.
65. Barres R, Yan J, Egan B, et al. Acute exercise remodels pro-
moter methylation in human skeletal muscle. Cell Metab . 2012;15:
405–411.
66. Wrann CD, White JP, Salogiannnis J, et al. Exercise induces hip-
pocampal BDNF through a PGC-1alpha/FNDC5 pathway. Cell
Metab . 2013;18:649–659.
67. Bonen A. PGC-1alpha-induced improvements in skeletal muscle
metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab .
2009;34:307–314.
68. Petrie M, Sharma A, Taylor EB, Suneja M, Shields RK. Impact of
short and long-term electrically induced muscle exercise on genesignaling pathways, gene expression, and PGC1a methylation inmen with spinal cord injury. Physiol Genomics . 2020;52:71–80.
69. Jacobsen SC, Brons C, Bork-Jensen J, et al. Effects of short-
term high-fat overfeeding on genome-wide DNA methylationin the skeletal muscle of healthy young men. Diabetologia .
2012;55:3341–3349.
70. Voermans AM, Mewes JC, Broyles MR, LMG S. Cost-effectiveness
analysis of a procalcitonin-guided decision algorithm for antibi-otic stewardship using real-world U.S. hospital data. OMICS .
2019;23:508–515.
71. Chen J, Hutchison KE, Bryan AD, et al. Opposite epigenetic asso-
ciations with alcohol use and exercise intervention. Front Psych .
2018;9:594.
72. Jansen EC, Dolinoy DC, O’Brien LM, et al. Sleep duration and
fragmentation in relation to leukocyte DNA methylation in ado-lescents. Sleep . 2019;42:zsz121.
73. Altintas A, Laker RC, Garde C, Barres R, Zierath JR. Transcrip-
tomic and epigenomics atlas of myotubes reveals insight into the
circadian control of metabolism and development. Epigenomics .
2020;12:701–713.
74. Voisin S, Eynon N, Yan X, Bishop DJ. Exercise training and DNA
methylation in humans. Acta Physiol . 2015;213:39–59.
75. McEwen BS. Integrative medicine: breaking down silos of
knowledge and practice an epigenetic approach. Metabolism .
2017;69S:S21–S29.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ptj/article/102/1/pzab247/6413906 by University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions user on 22 August 2022

