 International Journal of  
Molecular Sciences
Review
Signaling Pathways That Control Muscle Mass
Anna Vainshtein1
and Marco Sandri2,3,4,5,*
1Craft Science Inc. Toronto, ON L4J 7S2, Canada; anna@craftscience.ca
2Veneto Institute of Molecular Medicine, via Orus 2, 35129 Padua, Italy
3Department of Biomedical Science, University of Padua, via G. Colombo 3, 35100 Padua, Italy
4Myology Center, University of Padua, via G. Colombo 3, 35100 Padova, Italy
5Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada
*Correspondence: marco.sandri@unipd.it
Received: 29 May 2020; Accepted: 1 July 2020; Published: 4 July 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: The loss of skeletal muscle mass under a wide range of acute and chronic maladies is
associated with poor prognosis, reduced quality of life, and increased mortality. Decades of research
indicate the importance of skeletal muscle for whole body metabolism, glucose homeostasis, as well
as overall health and wellbeing. This tissue’s remarkable ability to rapidly and e ectively adapt to
changing environmental cues is a double-edged sword. Physiological adaptations that are beneﬁcial
throughout life become maladaptive during atrophic conditions. The atrophic program can be
activated by mechanical, oxidative, and energetic distress, and is inﬂuenced by the availability of
nutrients, growth factors, and cytokines. Largely governed by a transcription-dependent mechanism,
this program impinges on multiple protein networks including various organelles as well as
biosynthetic and quality control systems. Although modulating muscle function to prevent and
treat disease is an enticing concept that has intrigued research teams for decades, a lack of thorough
understanding of the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways that control muscle mass,
in addition to poor transferability of ﬁndings from rodents to humans, has obstructed e orts to
develop e ective treatments. Here, we review the progress made in unraveling the molecular
mechanisms responsible for the regulation of muscle mass, as this continues to be an intensive area
of research.
Keywords: skeletal muscle; atrophy; hypertrophy; sarcopenia
1. Introduction
In addition to its role in locomotion, skeletal muscle plays an essential role in whole body metabolism
and glucose homeostasis, and serves as a protein reservoir [ 1]. This tissue’s remarkable ability to rapidly
adapt to everchanging environmental and internal stimuli makes it vital for organismal health, survival,
and adaptability. It is also clear that muscle is not static and has endo- and exocrine functions. Various
myokines released from muscle act as messengers between skeletal muscle and other vital organs such as
the liver, heart, fat, and even brain [ 2]. This signaling has consequences for certain chronic diseases such
as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, cachexia, sarcopenia, and neurodegeneration, as well as many
others. These relationships reaffirm the key and indispensable role of skeletal muscle in organismal
health and survival. Indeed, many chronic diseases are accompanied and exacerbated by muscle
wasting, and muscle metabolic state has been suggested as a disease modifier [ 1,3]. As the number of
humans living with chronic diseases increases and the population continues to live longer, healthy aging
and independent living requires the maintenance of muscle mass. It is therefore imperative, now more
than ever before, to gain an intimate understanding of the molecular mechanisms that govern muscle
mass and function.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759; doi:10.3390 /ijms21134759 www.mdpi.com /journal /ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 2 of 28
In theory, muscle mass is determined through a simple balance between protein synthesis and
protein degradation. During steady state conditions, protein synthesis equals protein degradation
leading to proteostasis. Consistently, an increase in protein synthesis due to hormonal stimulation or
resistance exercise leads to an increase in total muscle protein and organelles, resulting in increased
muscle mass or hypertrophy. Whereas increased protein degradation due to reduced activity, defective
neural input or increased proteolysis leads to muscle atrophy. However, the situation is more
complicated, wherein the two seemingly opposing processes are typically active simultaneously,
both during atrophy and hypertrophy. For instance, under catabolic conditions, protein breakdown by
the proteasome and autophagy lysosome systems generate amino acids that can activate mechanistic
target of rapamycin (mTOR) [ 4,5], the master regulator of protein synthesis. Moreover, induction of
protein synthesis, by exercise for instance, also results in activation of protein breakdown as part of a
cellular turnover program to rejuvenate the cell [ 6–9]. This creates a system of feedback loops that is
more complicated than initially realized.
This is further complicated by the fact that skeletal muscle is not a homogenous tissue. Muscle is
composed of a number of di erent ﬁber types that have distinct metabolic and biochemical properties.
For instance, while fast twitch ﬁbers are more sensitive to nutrient deprivation, they are more resilient
to immobilization than slow twitch ﬁbers. Moreover, di erent atrophic programs are activated in the
dierent ﬁber types in response to the same stimulus, and of course the type of stimulus also dictates
the atrophic response of any given myoﬁber. Indeed, most human skeletal muscles consist of mixed
ﬁber types, and the precise ﬁber type composition depends on a number of factors such as genetics, sex,
physical activity, and many other factors. The ability to alter ﬁber type composition through lifestyle
changes grants muscle remarkable plasticity. Therefore, the susceptibility of various ﬁber types to
dierent atrophic stimuli and their molecular response may vary signiﬁcantly. This makes it di cult
to generalize conclusions when studying whole muscle homogenates or any single muscle ﬁber type.
It is therefore important to consider and investigate the di erential response of the various ﬁber types
and segregate ﬁndings on the basis of myoﬁber characteristics.
The molecular mechanisms underlying muscle atrophy and hypertrophy have been under intense
investigation for several decades, and some major progress has been made in the ﬁeld. This review
focuses on recent discoveries and advances in the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation
of muscle mass and plasticity. A comprehensive review of all bona ﬁde regulators of muscle mass,
which have been previously rigorously reviewed [10], is beyond the scope of this review.
2. Regulators of Protein Synthesis
2.1. mTOR
During development, skeletal muscle growth is thought to be largely mediated by pathways
converging on the metabolic master regulator mTOR. mTOR is a serine threonine protein kinase found
at the epicenter of cellular growth regulation. mTOR integrates metabolic, hormonal, and mechanical
signaling to determine the metabolic state of many cells including skeletal muscle. mTOR is activated
by an auspicious environment that is conducive to growth. Nutrients (such as amino acids), hormonal
stimulation (insulin /insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)), and mechanical and neural signaling activate
mTOR, while inﬂammation (cytokines) and cellular stressors such as unfolded proteins inhibit mTOR
activity [ 11]. Inhibition of mTOR during development either by rapamycin treatment or genetic
manipulation results in the obstruction of cellular growth [12].
mTOR exists in two distinct complexes, the rapamycin-sensitive mTORC1 characterized by the
presence of Raptor, and the rapamycin resistant mTORC2 characterized by the presence of Rictor.
mTORC2 appears to regulate glucose and lipid homeostasis while mTORC1 regulates anabolic processes
such as protein synthesis, as well as organelle biogenesis. mTORC1 regulates protein translation through
enhancing both translational e ciency and capacity. mTOR enhances the cell’s translational e ciency
by modulating p70S6K1, upstream of ribosomal protein S6 and factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1),
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 3 of 28
a negative regulator of ribosomal eukaryotic translation initiator factor 4E (eIF4E) [ 11] (Figure 1).
mTOR has also been demonstrated to regulate cellular translational capacity by directly binding
rDNA and enhancing ribosomal biogenesis [ 13]. In addition to activating translation, mTOR also
inhibits muscle catabolism by blocking the cell’s main proteolytic pathways, the ubiquitin proteasome
and the autophagy-lysosome systems [ 14]. True to its role, muscle-speciﬁc Rictor knockout mice do
not display an overt phenotype, but exhibit decreased insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, as well
as glucose intolerance [ 15]. A deﬁciency in Raptor, on the other hand, results in reduced postnatal
growth, progressive dystrophy, impaired oxidative capacity, and increased glycogen stores. Moreover,
pharmacological inhibition of mTORC1 blocks muscle hypertrophy in models of induced muscle
growth such as post-natal development, synergist ablation, and muscle regeneration. However,
although mTORC1 is necessary for mechanical load-induced hypertrophy, it does not appear to be
required for a mechanical load-induced increase in protein synthesis [ 16]. Interestingly, the loss of
mTOR’s catalytic activity seems to cause a more severe phenotype than the loss of mTOR protein.
Conditional loss of mTOR concomitant with the expression of kinase-inactive mTOR results in early
onset, rapidly progressing myopathy that impairs growth and leads to juvenile lethality. This was due
to a more robust suppression of mTORC1 signaling, leading to more signiﬁcant impairments in protein
synthesis, oxidative metabolism, and autophagy. Stronger feedback activation of protein kinase B
(PKB /Akt), and a dramatic downregulation of glycogen phosphorylase expression was also observed
in this model, resulting in features reminiscent of glycogen storage disease type V [ 17]. Consistently,
mTOR dysregulation has been documented in Pompe disease, a severe muscle wasting condition,
caused by excessive accumulation of lysosomal glycogen. Reactivation of mTOR in the muscle of Pompe
mice by tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1) knockdown, Ras homolog enriched in brain (Rheb) overexpression,
or arginine resulted in the reversal of atrophy and a striking removal of autophagic buildup [ 18]. This is
promising as a similar e ect was observed in valosin-containing protein-inclusion body myopathy
(VCP-IBM) muscle, where activation of mTOR led to amelioration of muscle atrophy [ 19]. Moreover,
increased myoﬁber size was observed in murine muscle following transient expression of Rheb [ 20].
Therefore, lack of mTOR appears to result in myoﬁber degeneration and muscle myopathy, suggesting
that mTOR is important for muscle growth, development, and survival. Another interesting observation
was that the loss of mTOR signaling in these models did not result in excessive autophagy, despite
its important inhibitory role in this process. Surprisingly, autophagy was impaired in these mice,
which contributed to pathogenesis [12,17].
Interestingly, excessive mTOR activation appears to be equally detrimental. Genetic deletion of the
mTOR inhibitor TSC1 in mice (which causes hyper activation of mTOR) results in a late-onset myopathy,
which is related to impaired autophagy [ 21]. In these mice, constitutive and starvation-induced
autophagy is blocked at the induction steps via mTORC1-mediated inhibition of ULK1, despite the
activation of FoxO3. Rapamycin treatment or raptor depletion was su cient to restore autophagy
in these mice and improve the muscle phenotype [ 22]. Moreover, mTOR activation was found to
contribute to denervation- and immobilization-induced atrophy [ 4,23], by both decreasing global
protein synthesis through an increase in eIF4F complex formation [ 23] and inducing a FoxO-mediated
catabolic program by blocking Akt [ 4]. Interestingly, rapamycin treatment was found to be su cient to
restore Akt activity and inhibit eIF4F complex formation, thereby mitigating muscle atrophy in both
models. On the other hand, activation of mTOR by isometric contraction or through overexpression of
Rheb enhanced mTOR signaling and rescued the immobilization-induced drop in protein synthesis
and muscle atrophy [23].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 4 of 28
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 32 
  
Figure 1. Pathways involved in protein synthesis. Duri ng muscle hypertrophy, the binding of insulin-
like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)/insulin to their re spective receptors activates IRS–PI3K–Akt–mTORC1 
signaling, which is further stimulated by the pr esence of amino acids. The mTORC1 complex then 
enhances protein synthesis by  inhibiting the eukaryotic translation initiator factor 4E (eIF4E) inhibitor  
4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) an d activating p70S6K-S6-mediated protein translation. mTOR also 
blocks proteolysis by inhibiting autophagy initiati on factors Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 
(ULK) 1/2. Clenbuterol and formoterol promote hype rtrophy by binding to the adrenergic receptor 
and activating adenylate cyclase (AC)-PKA signalin g, which culminates in the activation of Akt-
mTOR. In addition to enhancing pr otein synthesis, Akt also blocks  proteolysis by phosphorylating 
and inhibiting members of the fork head box O family of transcripti on factors (FoxO), as well as 
activating glycogen synthase kina se (GSK) 3 and ATP citrate lyase (A CL). Fibroblast growth factor 
(FGF)19 enhances protein sy nthesis by binding to the βKlotho receptor and stimulating the 
extracellular signal-regulated ki nase (ERK), which directly cont ributes to protein synthesis. 
Moreover, the binding of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)7/13/14 to the BMPR receptor promotes 
muscle growth through the formation of a SM AD1/5/8–SMAD4 complex, which activates a 
hypertrophic transcriptional program. Calcium sign aling also contributes to hypertrophy through the 
activation of calmodulin (CaM)-dependent kinase (CaMK) and phosphatase calcineurin, which 
stimulates the pro-growth  transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T-cell (NFAT ). Increased 
availability of nutrients and energy in the form of ATP further contribute to the auspicious environment that is permissive for muscle growth. Green shapes in dicate positive regulators of 
muscle mass, whereas red shapes indicate negative regulators.  
Interestingly, excessive mTOR activation appear s to be equally detrimental. Genetic deletion of 
the mTOR inhibitor TSC1 in mice (which causes hy per activation of mTOR) results in a late-onset 
myopathy, which is related to impaired autophagy [21]. In these mice, constitutive and starvation-
induced autophagy is blocked at the induction steps via mTORC1-mediated inhibition of ULK1, 
despite the activation of FoxO3. Rapamycin treatment or raptor depletion was sufficient to restore autophagy in these mice and improve the muscle phenotype[22]. Moreover , mTOR activation was 
found to contribute to denervation- and immobilization-induced atrophy[4,23], by both decreasing global protein synthesis through an increase in eIF4F complex formation[23] and inducing a FoxO-
mediated catabolic program by bloc king Akt[4]. Interestingly, rapamycin treatment was found to be 
Figure 1. Pathways involved in protein synthesis. During muscle hypertrophy, the binding of insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) /insulin to their respective receptors activates IRS–PI3K–Akt–mTORC1 signaling,
which is further stimulated by the presence of amino acids. The mTORC1 complex then enhances protein
synthesis by inhibiting the eukaryotic translation initiator factor 4E (eIF4E) inhibitor 4E-binding protein
1 (4E-BP1) and activating p70S6K-S6-mediated protein translation. mTOR also blocks proteolysis by
inhibiting autophagy initiation factors Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase (ULK) 1 /2. Clenbuterol
and formoterol promote hypertrophy by binding to the adrenergic receptor and activating adenylate
cyclase (AC)-PKA signaling, which culminates in the activation of Akt-mTOR. In addition to enhancing
protein synthesis, Akt also blocks proteolysis by phosphorylating and inhibiting members of the
forkhead box O family of transcription factors (FoxO), as well as activating glycogen synthase kinase
(GSK) 3 and ATP citrate lyase (ACL). Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)19 enhances protein synthesis
by binding to the Klotho receptor and stimulating the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK),
which directly contributes to protein synthesis. Moreover, the binding of bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)7 /13/14 to the BMPR receptor promotes muscle growth through the formation of a SMAD1 /5/8–
SMAD4 complex, which activates a hypertrophic transcriptional program. Calcium signaling also
contributes to hypertrophy through the activation of calmodulin (CaM)-dependent kinase (CaMK)
and phosphatase calcineurin, which stimulates the pro-growth transcription factor nuclear factor of
activated T-cell (NFAT). Increased availability of nutrients and energy in the form of ATP further
contribute to the auspicious environment that is permissive for muscle growth. Green shapes indicate
positive regulators of muscle mass, whereas red shapes indicate negative regulators.
A mounting body of evidence implicates the chronic activation of mTOR in aging skeletal muscle,
where mTORC1 signaling is hyperactivated in muscle of sarcopenic mice and humans [ 24,25]. Chronic
activation of mTOR in TSC1 knockout muscle results in mitochondrial dysfunction and increased
oxidative stress, which over time ultimately leads to ﬁber decay. This appears to be at least in part
due to increased expression of growth and di erentiation factor 15 (GDF15) by Stat3 [ 24]. However,
this e ect could also be due to mTOR’s role in blocking autophagy, which is closely associated with
muscle senescence [ 26]. Inhibition of mTORC1 in aging mouse reverses the senescent phenotype,
resulting in the sparing of muscle mass [24,25].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 5 of 28
Therefore, although mTOR is an important modulator of muscle growth during development,
chronic activation of mTOR later in life appears to have the opposite e ect. The precise mechanisms
involved in this metabolic role reversal are not clear, and the exact point in time in which mTOR
transforms from friend to foe, as well as the reason for this switch, remains a mystery. What is evident
is that mTOR is entangled in an increasingly complex molecular web, which it may itself be weaving.
It is therefore important to keep dissecting mTOR’s web and its role in the regulation of muscle mass.
2.2. Insulin /IGF-1
Upstream of mTOR, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) are well recognized for
their role in muscle growth. IGF-1 and insulin act by binding to their respective receptors (Figure 1),
which triggers the activation of several downstream kinases, culminating in the activation of Akt.
Akt then mediates cellular growth by both enhancing protein synthesis, through the inhibition of GSK-3 
and activation of mTOR, as well as blocking protein breakdown, through inhibition of the FoxO family
of transcription factors. GSK-3 impairs protein synthesis by inhibiting eIF2B ", and promotes atrophy
through increasing the expression of atrophic E3 ligases, muscle ring ﬁnger1 (MuRF1) and Atrogin-1,
as well as impairs muscle oxidative capacity by inhibiting mitochondrial biogenesis [ 27–29]. Blockade
of GSK-3suppresses muscle atrophy [ 27], facilitates a faster recovery from disuse atrophy [ 28],
and improves muscle oxidative capacity [ 29]. The FoxO family controls skeletal muscle’s atrophy
program by regulating the transcription of factors pertaining to both cellular proteolytic systems—the
ubiquitin proteasome and autophagy lysosome. Thus, during atrophic conditions, reduced signaling
through the IGF-1–Akt–mTOR axis contributes to atrophy not only through reduced protein synthesis,
but also through increased degradation by releasing FoxO inhibition [ 30–32]. Moreover, reduced
mTORC1 activity can also result in the activation of autophagy, as mTORC1-mediated phosphorylation
inhibits the autophagy induction complex composed of Atg13 and ULK1 [30,33,34].
Although IGF-1 is synthesized predominantly in the liver, in response to growth hormone
stimulation, recent evidence suggests that IGF-1 can also be produced by other peripheral tissues,
including skeletal muscle [ 35]. In fact, overexpression of a muscle-speciﬁc isoform of IGF-1 strongly
induces muscle growth and regeneration. Among the various isoforms, which di er mainly in their
N-terminal signaling peptide and C-terminal extension peptide, IGF-1Ea appears to be the most
eective in enhancing muscle growth and force generating capacity in young and aged mice [36].
While the importance of IGF-1 and insulin for muscle proteostasis and hypertrophy has been
known for a long time, the relative roles of each remained elusive. In an attempt to tease this out,
a recent study examined mice with muscle-speciﬁc deletions of the insulin receptor (IR), the IGF-1
receptor, or both. IR signaling contributed more to proteaostasis, and mice lacking this receptor had a
marked reduction in muscle mass, whereas mice lacking IGF-1R did not. Nonetheless, the overlap
of IR and IGF-1R signaling is critical to the regulation of muscle protein turnover as mice lacking
both receptors displayed a marked reduction in muscle mass that was linked to increased proteolysis.
Deletion of FoxO1, FoxO3, and FoxO4 in IR /IGF-1R double knockout mice reversed the increase in
autophagy and completely rescued muscle mass without impacting proteasomal activity. Thus, insulin
and IGF-1 work to suppress FoxO-regulated and autophagy-mediated protein degradation [37].
In addition to insulin and IGF-1, the desmosomal component plakoglobin was also found to bind
the insulin receptor and p85 subunit of PI3K, with this interaction promoting PI3K–Akt–FOXO signaling.
PI3K–p85 interaction is disrupted during atrophy by ubiquitin ligase tripartite motif-containing
protein 32 (Trim32). Plakoglobin overexpression or inhibition of Trim32 was su cient to increase
PI3K–Akt–FOXO signaling, enhance glucose uptake, and induce ﬁber growth, whereas downregulation
of Plakoglobin or overexpression of Trim32 had the opposite e ect [38].
2.3.2-Adrenergic Signaling
The beta-2 adrenergic receptor ( 2 adrenoreceptor) is activated by epinephrine (adrenaline) and
mediates the anabolic e ects of2-adrenergic agonists such as clenbuterol or formoterol (Figure 1).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 6 of 28
This e ect is facilitated by Akt /mTOR signaling as treatment with rapamycin abolishes this e ect [39].
Recent studies have demonstrated that 2-adrenergic signaling impinges on insulin /IGF-1 receptor
signaling [ 40], where genetic or pharmacological inhibition of the insulin or IGF-1 receptor abolishes the
anti-proteolytic e ect of2-adrenergic agonists. Interestingly, formoterol also induces the expression
of JunB, a transcription factor that promotes muscle hypertrophy independently of mTOR [41].
2.4. Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs)
Fibroblast growth factors regulate a broad spectrum of biological functions, including cellular
proliferation, survival, migration, and di erentiation. They have been implicated in the regulation
of self-renewal in skeletal muscle stem cells (satellite cells), as well as the maintenance and repair of
skeletal muscle [ 42]. The signaling pathways downstream of FGFs include RAS /MAP kinase, PI3K /Akt,
and PLC pathways. Until recently, only two FGFs, FGF2 and FGF6, have been documented to
inﬂuence muscle mass by regulating satellite cell function. Recently, FGF19 was found to positively
regulate muscle mass during atrophy induced by glucocorticoid treatment, obesity, and sarcopenia [ 43].
FGF19 treatment was able to induce muscle hypertrophy, both in mice and human myotubes, through
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1 /2) and S6K1-mediated signaling (Figure 1).
This e ect required the FGF19 receptor -Klotho (KLB). Interestingly, the closely related family member
FGF21 did not have the same e ect [ 43]. On the contrary, FGF21 is released by atrophic muscle
and mediates muscle atrophy and weakness by enhancing autophagy and mitophagy ﬂux through
stimulation of Bnip3 [ 44]. Mice lacking FGF21 in muscle did not experience loss of muscle mass or
strength in response to fasting, whereas overexpression of FGF21 was su cient to induce autophagy
and muscle atrophy in mice. These contradictory ﬁndings among FGF family members are surprising
since both FGF19 and FGF21 act on the same -Klotho receptor [ 44]. Moreover, a recent study found
that mitochondrial respiratory chain deﬁciency elicited a compensatory response in skeletal muscle by
increasing the expression of FGF21, which resulted in enhanced mitochondrial function through an
mTOR–YY1–PGC-1 -dependent mechanism [ 45]. Therefore, further research into FGFs, their target
cell populations, and mechanisms is warranted.
2.5. Ions
Various ions are known to regulate muscle trophism. For instance, calcium signaling and dynamics
are essential for muscle function and proteostasis. Intracellular calcium concentrations play a pivotal
role in muscle physiology and either too much or too little can be detrimental. Calcium levels regulate
calmodulin (CaM), which activates calcium /CaM-dependent kinases (CaMK) and phosphatases such
as calcineurin (Cn), which stimulates the activity of nuclear factor of activated T-cell (NFAT; Figure 1).
NFAT is a transcription factor involved in regulating muscle oxidative capacity as well as ﬁber size.
This pathway was recently found to be hyperactivated in Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) as a
beneﬁcial compensatory adaptation to the disease [46].
Altered zinc homeostasis also appears to play a role in the regulation of muscle mass. Metal-ion
transporter ZRT- and IRT-like protein 14 (ZIP14) were shown to mediate cancer-induced cachexia.
ZIP14-mediated zinc uptake into muscle progenitor cells represses the expression of MyoD and Mef2c,
blocks muscle-cell di erentiation, and induces loss of contractile proteins. Furthermore, ZIP14 is
upregulated in cachectic muscle of mice and patients and can be induced by tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) and transforming growth factor (TGF). Deletion of ZIP14 markedly reduces cancer-induced
muscle atrophy in mice [ 47]. Moreover, metallothionein 1 and 2, small proteins known to bind
heavy metals such as zinc and copper, have also been implicated in the regulation of muscle mass.
Simultaneous blockade of both metallothioneins results in the activation of Akt–mTOR signaling and
myoﬁber growth, as well as spares muscle mass during glucocorticoid treatment. How these proteins
activate Akt and protein synthesis is unclear, but gene expression analyses revealed an increase in
IGF-1 and androgen receptor [48].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 7 of 28
2.6. TGF 
The transforming growth factor (TGF) superfamily is composed of 30 secreted proteins that
govern a wide variety of cellular processes. The TGF family can be subdivided into two ligand
subfamilies: the TGF /activin subfamily and the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) subfamily,
which appear to have opposite roles in skeletal muscle (Figures 1 and 2). Perhaps the most well-known
TGFfamily member is myostatin (growth and di erentiation factor 8, GDF8), a potent negative
regulator of muscle growth [49,50]. The hyper-muscularity of mammals including mice, dogs, sheep,
cattle, and humans devoid of myostatin has fascinated scientists and body building enthusiasts
for decades [ 49,51]. However, its biology has proved to be quite complicated. Myostatin and its
TGF/activin family members can both enhance muscle growth and induce atrophy, depending
on the downstream signaling they activate. These factors bind to plasma membrane receptors
activin type IIA and type IIB (ActRIIA /B), as well as TGF receptors (TGF RII), and negatively
regulate muscle mass by activating activin receptor-like kinase (ALK)-4, -7, and -5, which in turn
phosphorylate SMAD2 /3 and promote the formation of a heterotrimeric complex with SMAD4 [ 52–54].
SMAD 2 /3 can inhibit the transcription factor JunB, which normally promotes muscle growth and
inhibits atrophy by blocking FoxO3 [ 41,52]. However, when myostatin /Activin /GDF11 are blocked,
this SMAD2 /3–SMAD4 complex can promote muscle growth. Although it is not clear how these
factors regulate muscle mass, some evidence suggests that they impinge on the Akt /mTOR axis.
Indeed, rapamycin treatment or mTOR knockdown diminishes the hypertrophic e ect of myostatin
blockade [ 52,54,55]. Moreover, SMAD3 can increase the expression of Atrogin-1 and inhibit Akt /mTOR
signaling by negatively regulating the expression of miR-29 and -486, which inhibit the phosphatase
and tensin homolog (PTEN) [ 56,57]. This results in increased Akt activation, thus enhancing protein
synthesis. Surprisingly, myostatin is dispensable during denervation-induced muscle atrophy. In this
scenario, denervation results in a blockage of IGF-1 signaling, and in increased levels of SMAD2 /3,
as well as E3 ubiquitin ligases Atrogin-1 and MuRF1. Interestingly, while SMAD2 /3-deﬁcient muscle
is resistant to denervation-induced muscle atrophy [ 58], SMAD4-null mice are slightly atrophic and
weaker than wild type litter mates, and exhibit exacerbated atrophy following denervation [58].
In contrast, BMPs act to prevent muscle atrophy by activating SMAD1 /5/8, repressing MUSA1,
a novel E3 ligase downstream of TGF , and activating mTOR signaling [ 59–61]. Indeed, BMP signaling
is increased in models of muscle growth, while RNA interference of MUSA1 is protective against
denervation-induced atrophy. Moreover, blocking TGF signaling through the administration of a
soluble receptor (ActRIIB) was able to rescue muscle mass under several atrophic models, reverse
cancer cachexia, and, remarkably, delay mortality independently of tumor progression [ 62]. Moreover,
SMAD6 and 7, which are inhibitor proteins, prevent receptor-mediated activation of SMAD1 /5/8 and
SMAD2 /3, respectively [ 61,63]. Although inhibiting the phosphorylation of SMAD1 /5 exacerbates
denervation-induced muscle atrophy, increasing BMP-SMAD1 /5 activity is protective against this
model of muscle atrophy [ 61]. Moreover, blocking BMP signaling by overexpression of BMP antagonist
Noggin reverts the hypertrophic phenotype of Myostatin knockout mice, promoting the idea of
genetic epistasis between the Activin /Myostatin and BMP pathways in skeletal muscle. Consistently,
follistatin-mediated hypertrophy not only blocks myostatin signaling but simultaneously stimulates
SMAD1 /5/8 activation and repression of ankyrin repeat and SOCs box protein 2 (Asb2), a negative
regulator of muscle mass [ 59,61,64]. Therefore, it appears that SMAD2 /3 and SMAD1 /5/8 compete
for SMAD4 with opposing e ects on muscle mass. Muscle hypertrophy involves crosstalk between
BMP /ALK2 /SMAD1 /5/8 and Akt /mTOR pathways, where inhibition of mTOR signaling prevents
BMP-mediated hypertrophy of skeletal muscle.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 8 of 28
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 32 
 Myostatin knockout mice, promoting the idea of ge netic epistasis between the Activin/Myostatin and 
BMP pathways in skeletal muscle. Consistently, follistatin-mediated hypertrophy not only blocks myostatin signaling but simultaneously stimulates SMAD1/5/8 activation and repression of ankyrin 
repeat and SOCs box protein 2 (Asb2), a negative regulator of muscle mass[ 59,61,64]. Therefore, it 
appears that SMAD2/3 and SMAD1/5/8 compete for SMAD4 with opposing effects on muscle mass. Muscle hypertrophy involves crosstalk between BMP/ALK2/SMAD1/5/8 and Akt/mTOR pathways, where inhibition of mTOR signaling prevents BM P-mediated hypertrophy of skeletal muscle.  
Thus, decades of research continue to highligh t to importance of Akt/mTOR pathways in the 
regulation of muscle growth, as many molecular and intercellular messengers impinge on this pathway. However, the unexpected findings th at mTOR counterproductively induces muscle 
atrophy under various atrophic conditions, includin g aging, is disconcerting. Therefore, further 
research into mTOR is warranted. Equally importan t is the identification of factors that are mTOR-
independent, or those that can circumvent mTOR in the regulation of muscle mass.  
 
Figure 2. Pathways involved in protein degradation. During muscle atrophy, decreased binding of 
IGF-1/insulin to their respective receptors and/ or increased binding of glucocorticoids to the 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) result in reduced Akt/ mTOR activation. This lead s to diminished protein 
synthesis mediated by 4E-BP1-induced inhibition of eIF4E. Diminished mTOR activity also leads to the stimulation of autophagy through ULK1/2 sign aling. At the same time, reduced Akt activity 
results in the release of FoxO from its cytosolic capt ivity, allowing it to acti vate an atrophic program 
by stimulating the expression of atrogenes belo nging to the autophagy lysosome and ubiquitin 
proteasome proteolytic pathways. This sustains the increased proteolytic activity of these systems. 
The FoxO-induced atrophic program can be furthe r enhanced by Dickkopf 3 (Dkk3) and blocked by 
PGC-1α and Foxk. Increased binding of activins (ActivinA, growth and differentiation factor 11 
(GDF11)) and myostatin to the Activin type 2 (ActRI IB) receptor can contribute to atrophy through 
the activation of activin receptor-like kinase (ALK)2/3 and the formation of the SMAD2/3-SMAD4 
complex, which in addition to furt her inhibiting Akt, also induces th e expression of proteins involved 
in atrophy. Muscle atrophy is often accompanied by  inflammation, which contributes to proteolysis. 
Increased levels of circulating cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), TNF-like weak 
Figure 2. Pathways involved in protein degradation. During muscle atrophy, decreased binding
of IGF-1 /insulin to their respective receptors and /or increased binding of glucocorticoids to the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) result in reduced Akt /mTOR activation. This leads to diminished protein
synthesis mediated by 4E-BP1-induced inhibition of eIF4E. Diminished mTOR activity also leads to the
stimulation of autophagy through ULK1 /2 signaling. At the same time, reduced Akt activity results in
the release of FoxO from its cytosolic captivity, allowing it to activate an atrophic program by stimulating
the expression of atrogenes belonging to the autophagy lysosome and ubiquitin proteasome proteolytic
pathways. This sustains the increased proteolytic activity of these systems. The FoxO-induced atrophic
program can be further enhanced by Dickkopf 3 (Dkk3) and blocked by PGC-1 and Foxk. Increased
binding of activins (ActivinA, growth and di erentiation factor 11 (GDF11)) and myostatin to the Activin
type 2 (ActRIIB) receptor can contribute to atrophy through the activation of activin receptor-like kinase
(ALK)2 /3 and the formation of the SMAD2 /3-SMAD4 complex, which in addition to further inhibiting
Akt, also induces the expression of proteins involved in atrophy. Muscle atrophy is often accompanied
by inﬂammation, which contributes to proteolysis. Increased levels of circulating cytokines such as
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), TNF-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK), and IL6 leads to
the activation of TRAF6, TRADD, IKK, and JAK which, in turn, activate NF- B, Stat3, and FoxO,
thus enhancing the expression of atrogenes. Mitochondrial dysfunction is also often observed during
muscle atrophy, which leads to increased oxidative stress and mitophagy. Oxidative stress stimulates
the release of IGF21, which then feeds back onto muscle, enhancing the expression of mitophagy
receptor Bnip3. Accumulation of PINK1 and localization of E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin as well as Bnip3
on the mitochondrial membrane lead to the elimination of dysfunctional mitochondria by mitophagy.
Muscle atrophy is also associated with ER stress, which activates the unfolded protein response (UPR).
UPR-activated IRE and PERK-eIF2 then promote atrophic transcriptional programs regulated by
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and ATF4, respectively. HDAC4, which is normally supressed by CaMK,
is upregulated during denervation, resulting in the inhibition of Dach2, a transcriptional repressor of
myogenin. This culminates in increased myogenin-mediated transcription of synaptic factors MuSK
and AChR, as well as atrogenes muscle ring ﬁnger1 (MuRF1) and Atrogin-1. Green shapes indicate
positive regulators of muscle mass, whereas red shapes indicate negative regulators.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 9 of 28
Thus, decades of research continue to highlight to importance of Akt /mTOR pathways in the
regulation of muscle growth, as many molecular and intercellular messengers impinge on this pathway.
However, the unexpected ﬁndings that mTOR counterproductively induces muscle atrophy under
various atrophic conditions, including aging, is disconcerting. Therefore, further research into mTOR
is warranted. Equally important is the identiﬁcation of factors that are mTOR-independent, or those
that can circumvent mTOR in the regulation of muscle mass.
3. Regulators of Proteolysis
The two major proteolytic pathways within skeletal muscle, the ubiquitin–proteasome and
autophagy–lysosome systems, are responsible for the degradation of most proteins and organelles.
However, two additional systems, the calcium-dependent calpain, and caspase systems are also
responsible for some restricted proteolysis [ 65–67]. During atrophy, all systems appear to be working in
unison, like a well-oiled disassembling line, with each responsible for its own repertoire of proteins to
degrade at speciﬁc times during the process (Figure 2). Moreover, since muscle atrophy is a dynamic and
continuous process, it also requires continuous transcriptional input to fuel the proteolytic pathways.
3.1. Ubiquitin–Proteasome System
The ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS) is responsible for degrading most individual proteins.
Components of the UPS are amongst the most commonly upregulated genes in various models
of muscle atrophy including diabetes, denervation, cancer cachexia, fasting, and renal failure [ 68].
Proteins destined for degradation are ﬁrst tagged by the addition of polyubiquitin chains, a process
that involves three distinct components—E1, E2, and E3. E3 enzymes catalyze the rate-limiting
step in ubiquitin conjugation and are extremely substrate-speciﬁc, providing selectivity to the UPS.
Once tagged, the protein is delivered to the proteasome for digestion. Interestingly, E3 ligases
auto-ubiquitinate, which makes them more susceptible to proteasomal degradation, thus requiring
continuous transcriptional replenishment. Two muscle-speciﬁc E3 ubiquitin ligases, muscle ring
ﬁnger1 (MuRF1 /Trim63) and muscle atrophy F-box (Atrogin-1 /MAFbx), are dramatically upregulated
during various types of atrophy [ 68–71]. Moreover, mice deﬁcient in MuRF1 and Atrogin-1 are
partially protected against disuse atrophy [ 69]. MuRF1 appears to tag muscle structural proteins for
degradation, whereas Atrogin-1 targets proteins involved in growth and survival pathways. Atrogin-1
was also found to regulate the proteolysis of autophagy–lysosome-related proteins in cardiac tissue [ 72].
However, various catabolic conditions, which result in atrophy, elicit vastly di erent molecular
responses within skeletal muscle. For instance, MuRF1 knockout animals are not protected from
fasting or microgravity-induced atrophy, and are only partially protected from denervation-induced
atrophy [ 69,73]. However, these mice are protected from glucocorticoid treatment and aging-related
loss of muscle mass [ 74–76], although MuRF1-null aged muscle remains weaker [ 76]. Loss of Atrogin-1,
on the other hand, does not protect from glucocorticoid-, denervation-, or aging-induced muscle
wasting [ 59,74,76,77], and only partially protects from starvation-induced atrophy [ 78]. Atrogin-1
knockout mice actually die prematurely from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy [72,76].
Although MuRF1 and Atrogin-1 play a dominant role in muscle atrophy, over 650 E3 ubiquitin
ligases have been identiﬁed within the genome, and additional E3 ligases involved in muscle atrophy
continue to be recognized. For example, Trim32 is responsible for the degradation of thin ﬁlaments,
desmin, and z-band components, and inhibition or downregulation of Trim32 during atrophic
conditions is protective against muscle loss [ 79]. Interestingly, Trim32 also functions as an inhibitor
of PI3K–Akt–FoxO-pro growth signaling by regulating plakoglobin–PI3K binding [ 38]. Moreover,
Trim32 has been recently documented to induce autophagy during muscle atrophy by interacting with
ULK1 and AMBRA1 [ 80]. Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is another E3
ligase that is upregulated during muscle atrophy, and acts upstream of NF- B [81]. TRAF6 catalyzes
the conjugation of ubiquitin to the Lys63 residue of its target proteins. Lys63-linked ubiquitination
is more commonly associated with autophagic degradation because it is recognized by the adaptor
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 10 of 28
protein p62, as compared to Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chains that signal proteasome-dependent
degradation [ 82,83]. Indeed, TRAF6-dependent Lys63 polyubiquitination stabilizes and enhances
ULK1 activity, which is permissive for autophagy induction [ 84]. Mice lacking TRAF6 are protected
against atrophy induced by denervation, cancer, and starvation [ 81]. This protection involves not
only a signiﬁcant reduction in polyubiquitinated proteins, but also reduced induction of fellow E3
ligases Atrogin-1 and MuRF1. This may be because TRAF6 is required for the optimal activation of
JNK, AMPK, FoxO3, and NF- B [81]. Therefore, TRAF6 appears to coordinate both major proteolytic
pathways in response to atrophic stimuli in skeletal muscle.
Additional novel E3 ubiquitin ligases belonging to the Skp1–cullin-1–FBOX E3 ubiquitin ligase
complex (SCF) have been identiﬁed and found to contribute to muscle loss during fasting, denervation,
and cancer cachexia [ 59,85–87]. MUSA1 ( Fbxo30 ) [59,71], SMART ( Fbxo21 ), and Fbxo31 [ 85] are all
induced during atrophic conditions and their inhibition materially reduces muscle wasting. Moreover,
a recent study found SMART and Fbxo31 to be upregulated in a rodent model of critical illness-induced
myopathy, and this upregulation was blunted by passive mechanical loading [ 88]. Although these
ubiquitin E3 ligases contribute to proteolysis under various atrophic stimuli, they are not, on their
own, su cient to induce atrophy, with the sole exception of Ankyrin repeat and SOCS box-containing
2b (Asb2b) [ 64]. This E3 ligase must be suppressed to induce muscle growth, and its overexpression
alone results in atrophy. However, the substrates of this ligase remain unidentiﬁed and warrant
further investigation.
To make matters even more complicated, the ubiquitination process is reversible, and targets can
be de-ubiquitinated by ubiquitin-speciﬁc hydrolases. Thus far, only two such proteases, ubiquitin
carboxyl-terminal hydrolase (USP)14 and USP19, have been found to be upregulated under atrophic
conditions [ 70,89]. Interestingly, the expression of USP19 correlates with that of MuRF1 and Atrogin-1
in skeletal muscles from patients with lung or gastrointestinal cancer. Moreover, knockout or
knockdown of USP19 in mice and muscle cells partially protects muscle from glucocorticoid- and
denervation-induced atrophy [ 90,91]. Although this presents an enticing point of regulation, to date,
little is known about these enzymes in skeletal muscle.
The upregulation in E3 ligases during atrophy must be accompanied by increased proteasomal
capacity in order to accommodate the surge in demand for protein breakdown. Indeed, the expression of
several proteasomal subunits is increased during atrophy. Proteasomal subunit PSMD13 is upregulated
in atrophying muscle from both lung cancer and renal failure patients [ 71]. Consistently, zinc ﬁnger
protein ZNF216 (also known as ZFAND5) was found to bind the 26S proteasome and enhance
its proteolytic activity by increasing ATP hydrolysis [ 92]. Like many other proteolytic proteins,
ZNF216 is regulated by FoxO transcription factors, and mice lacking ZNF2016 exhibit decreased
denervation-induced atrophy [ 93]. Post-translational modiﬁcation of proteasomal subunits also
augments proteasomal activity under muscle-wasting conditions. For instance, in mice fasted for
12–48 h, the levels of cAMP , PKA-dependent Rpn6 phosphorylation, and proteasomal activities were
all increased without changes in proteasomal protein content [94].
Although the role of the ubiquitin proteasome system in muscle proteolysis is well established,
the role, if any, this system plays in muscle growth has only recently been investigated. In both
Drosophila and mouse myoﬁbers, loss of UBR4, the N-end rule ubiquitin-protein ligase, induces
hypertrophy by reducing the ubiquitination and degradation of a core set of target proteins, including
the HAT1 /RBBP4 /RBBP7 histone-binding complex [ 95]. Interestingly, the importance of N-end rule
ubiquitination in the regulation of muscle proteolysis was recognized over two decades ago. Indeed,
this proteolytic mechanism is responsible for up to 60% of ATP-dependent degradation of soluble
proteins in extracts from normal skeletal muscles, but not other cell types. Additionally, the activity
of the N-end rule pathway increases in physiological and pathological states where muscle protein
breakdown is elevated. More research into this pathway and its role in the regulation of muscle mass is
therefore strongly warranted. Interestingly, the de-ubiquitinating enzyme USP19 is also involved in the
regulation of myoﬁbrillar protein transcription [ 91]. Indeed, its depletion increases the transcript levels
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 11 of 28
of the MHC tropomyosin in a myogenin-dependant way. These ﬁndings indicate that the ubiquitin
system not only mediates the increased protein breakdown but is also involved in modulating protein
synthesis in atrophying skeletal muscle.
Although the UPS greatly contributes to muscle atrophy by degrading a large mass of proteins,
this system cannot degrade intact myoﬁbrils or organelles and therefore cannot alone account for muscle
atrophy [67]. This suggests that proteolytic systems work in unison to promote muscular atrophy.
3.2. The Autophagy-Lysosomal System
The autophagy–lysosome system allows for the bulk degradation of long-lived organelles and
superﬂuous proteins. In this process, tagged portions of the cytoplasm, dysfunctional organelles,
and protein aggregates are sequestered into double membrane vesicles. These vesicles are known as
autophagosomes and are delivered to the lysosome for proteolysis. A mouse line expressing green
ﬂuorescent protein tagged microtubule-associated proteins 1A /1B light chain 3 (LC3; an essential factor
responsible for autophagosome formation), revealed muscle to have one of highest rates of autophagy
during nutrient depletion [ 96]. Interestingly, glycolytic type II muscles display a higher content of
autophagosomes than slow oxidative type I muscles, and indeed autophagy ﬂux is higher in these
muscles, both basally and in response to fasting [ 96,97]. Moreover, hyperactivation of autophagy
exacerbates muscle atrophy induced by a myriad of naturally occurring and experimentally manipulated
conditions, including cancer cachexia, fasting, sepsis, critical illness, cirrhosis, chemotherapy, disuse,
denervation, COPD, constitutively active FoxO3, and by oxidative stress resulting from a mutation in
superoxide dismutase (SOD1G93A), a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Reducing
autophagy by LC3 knockdown preserves muscle mass under certain atrophic conditions [98].
However, a basal level autophagy is important for the degradation of damaged and superfluous
cellular components, thus acting as a housekeeping mechanism and promoting continuous cellular
turnover which is vital for stress resistance. Indeed, muscle-specific deficiencies in the essential autophagy
factors Atg5 or Atg7, VPS15, ULK2, AMPK, and mTOR result in loss of force generating capacity,
activation of unfolded protein response, accumulation of dysfunctional organelles and damaged proteins ,
culminating in myoﬁber degeneration [ 22,99–103].Loss of autophagy also results in an exacerbation of
muscle wasting in response to atrophic stimuli such as starvation and denervation. Moreover, deficient
autophagy is implicated in a myriad of myopathies and muscular dystrophies [99,104–107] , which can be
rescued by the reactivation of this process [ 99,104–106]. Thus, autophagy is required for muscle mass
maintenance, and is critical for the quality control of skeletal muscle organelles; however, over-active
autophagy can result in excessive catabolism and atrophy .
Evidence implicating aberrant autophagy in aging-induced atrophy have been accumulating.
For instance, aged rats demonstrate higher expression of autophagy proteins basally; however, they are
less able to further upregulate autophagy in response to perturbations, indicating reduced plasticity [ 108].
The accumulation of undegraded cellular materials in the form of lipofuscin is also suggestive of impaired
autophagy in aged animals [ 108]. Moreover, the characteristics of autophagy-deficient muscle closely
mirror those of sarcopenic muscle. Muscles deficient in Atg7 or TSC2 are characterized by degeneration
of the neuromuscular junction, atrophy, and the loss of force generating capacity, leading to a premature
aging phenotype and even death [ 26,100,109,110]. Interestingly, this phenotype is partially prevented
by antioxidants, indicating the importance of autophagy in the elimination of oxidized proteins
and dysfunctional mitochondria [ 26,109,111]. Similarly, removal of dysfunctional mitochondria by
stimulating mitophagy with urolithin A, prolongs lifespan in the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans ,
and improves muscle function is aged rodents [ 112]. Moreover, chronic caloric restriction, with or
without exercise, was found to activate autophagy and improve muscle health with aging [113].
Therefore, aside from its catabolic role, autophagy is responsible for cellular quality control and
proper organelle turnover which is vital for muscle health and homeostasis. However, autophagy
must be kept in check, since, if gone rogue, it can result in excessive catabolism and muscle wasting.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 12 of 28
3.3. VCP /P97
Skeletal muscle ultrastructure is composed of highly organized and tightly packed myoﬁbrillar
proteins. This presents a logistical problem for degradation pathways, where contractile elements
and proteins found within large complexes are not easily accessible to large and bulky degradation
systems. Thus, a mechanism to release, extract, and deliver these proteins for proteolysis must exist.
The valosin-containing protein (VCP /p97) is an ATPase responsible for segregating ubiquitin-tagged
proteins from large cellular structures such as protein assemblies, organelle membranes, and alike,
and chaperoning them for degradation by the proteasome or lysosome. Consistently, VCP /p97 and its
co-factors, Ufd1 and p47 were found to associate with speciﬁc myoﬁbrillar proteins and accelerate
protein degradation during muscle atrophy, via both the proteasomal and autophagic pathways [ 114].
This suggests a role for p97 in extracting ubiquitinated proteins from myoﬁbrillar structures [ 114].
Interestingly, p97 is methylated by methyltransferase-like 21e (Mettl21e) and Meetl21c [ 115,116],
and loss of this methylation reduces its ATPase activity, leading to impairments in proteasomal [ 115]
and autophagosomal [116] protein degradation.
Therefore, the various proteolytic systems in skeletal muscle work in concert to promote protein
breakdown, acting as de facto boots on the ground to mediate atrophy. Each system contributes, albeit
to varying degrees, to proteolysis, thus inhibiting one system has not been su cient to fully block
atrophy, as the others tend to compensate and pick up the slack.
4. Transcriptional Regulators of Muscle Mass
Although the transcriptional regulation of atrophy is complex and largely stimulus-dependent,
comparative gene expression proﬁling of a number of atrophy models resulted in the discovery of several
genes that are coordinately regulated under the various atrophic conditions [ 68,69]. These genes
are known collectively as atrophy-related genes (atrogenes) and include molecules involved in
both the ubiquitin–proteasome and the autophagy–lysosome proteolytic systems. Interestingly,
several cellular signaling pathways have been documented to converge on the transcription of these
key atrophic components. The FoxO family of transcription factors [ 117–119], NF-B [120,121],
the HDAC4-myogenin axis, and factors downstream of TGF [49,59,60] have all been demonstrated to
impinge on the atrophic transcriptional program, culminating in the induction of atrogenes (Figure 2).
4.1. FoxOs
The FoxO family of transcriptional regulators consists of FoxO1, 3, 4, and 6, and is involved in a wide
range of biological processes including metabolism, cellular proliferation and di erentiation, apoptosis,
longevity, and muscle mass regulation [ 122,123]. In skeletal muscle, FoxO1 and FoxO3 have both been
documented to induce muscle atrophy in response to disuse and metabolic distress [68,118,119] .
Overexpression of FoxO3 alone is su cient to induce muscle atrophy [ 117–119] through the
upregulation of E3 ligases [ 118], as well as the autophagy factors LC3 and BNIP3 [ 117,119]. Moreover,
knockdown of FoxO3, or the expression of dominant negative FoxO3, blocks the induction of Atrogin-1
and MuRF1 under some atrophic conditions [ 118,124,125]. Similar to FoxO3, FoxO1 can also induce
muscle atrophy by upregulating Atrogin-1 and MuRF1 [ 122,124], and the inhibition or genetic deletion
of multiple FoxOs completely prevents the loss of muscle mass and force generating capacity in response
to various atrophic stimuli, including fasting, glucocorticoid treatment, diabetes, limb immobilization,
as well as partially spare muscle during denervation-induced atrophy [4,85,126,127].
FoxO activity is all about location, and these transcription factors must be de-phosphorylated
before they are allowed entry into the nucleus. During atrophy, decreased levels of Akt leave FoxOs
uninhibited and free to enter the nucleus. Moreover, AMPK [ 128–130], GSK1 [ 131,132], p38 MAPK [ 133],
ERK [ 133,134], JNK [ 135,136], IKK [ 137], and MST1 [ 138,139] all phosphorylate FoxOs and regulate
their activity. In addition to phosphorylation, the activity of FoxO transcription factors can be regulated
by other posttranslational modiﬁcations, including acetylation, ubiquitination, and methylation [ 140].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 13 of 28
For instance, acetylation of FoxO3 by p300 /CBP inhibits FoxO3-mediated muscle atrophy [ 130,141],
whereas deacetylation by HDAC1 activates FoxO and is both su cient and required to induce muscle
atrophy [ 141]. Surprisingly, deacetylation by Sirt1 has the opposite e ect, inhibiting FoxO1 and 3,
thereby blocking muscle atrophy and promoting growth [ 142]. Moreover, methylation by the arginine
methyl transferase PRMT6 activates FoxO3. PRMT1, in turn, negatively regulates PRMT6 where
PRMT1-deﬁcient muscles exhibit hyperactive FoxO3 and muscle atrophy [ 143]. The capacity of FoxO3
to be post-translationally modiﬁed allows for the rapid potentiation of the atrophy program, which also
presents an attractive target for pharmacological manipulation.
Interestingly, PGC-1 andcan inhibit FoxO3 activity on the promoters of atrogenes, thus rescuing
muscle mass during denervation and fasting [ 144,145]. Glucocorticoid receptor and -catenin, on the
other hand, work synergistically with FoxOs to activate the transcription of atrogenes and induce
muscle atrophy [ 146,147]. Moreover, secreted glycoprotein Dickkopf 3 (Dkk3) has been recently
implicated in promoting aging sarcopenia by enhancing the nuclear import of -catenin and promoting
its interaction with FoxO3 [148].
FoxO transcription factors are also themselves transcriptionally regulated during catabolic conditions.
Indeed, glucocorticoid receptor activation can directly induce FoxO mRNA expression [149–151] . Moreover,
FoxO activity may also be indirectly impacted by chromatin remodeling. The bromodomain and extra-
terminal domain (BET) protein BRD4 was found to be an epigenetic regulator of muscle mass. BET proteins
appear to directly activate the muscle atrophy program during cachexia, and a pan-BET inhibitor protects
tumor-bearing mice from loss of muscle and body mass, which dramatically prolongs survival, independent
of tumor growth. In addition to their direct epigenetic action, BET proteins also coordinate an IL6-dependent
AMPK nuclear signaling pathway converging on FoxO3, which contributes to cancer cachexia [152].
FoxO activity also appears to be counter-balanced by Foxk proteins (Foxk1 and Foxk2), which are
transcriptional repressors of autophagy in muscle cells and fibroblasts [ 153]. FoxOs’ autophagic and
atrophic transcriptional targets overlap quite a bit with those of Foxk, suggesting these two transcriptional
regulators may act as the yin and yang of the muscle atrophy program. During nutrient-rich conditions,
mTOR promotes the nuclear localization of Foxk1 /2, which recruits Sin3A–HDAC complexes, thereby
blocking histone H4 acetylation and restricting the expression of autophagy genes.
Therefore, FoxO transcription factors enable the progression of muscle atrophy by potentiating a
transcriptional atrophic program that continuously fuels proteolytic pathways.
4.2. NF- B
Inﬂammation often accompanies muscle atrophy, and can in itself activate an atrophic program
under the command of transcription factor NF- B. Under basal conditions, NF- B is sequestered in
the cytoplasm by the I B family of inhibitors. Levels of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) and IL6 are increased in circulation during inﬂammation. The binding of TNF to its receptor
facilitates the proteasomal degradation of I B, resulting in the translocation of NF- B to the nucleus
where it induces the transcription of atrogenes. Blocking NF- B action through the overexpression
of a negative regulator of this system (inhibitor of NF- alpha, I) is su cient to prevent disuse
atrophy [ 121,154], whereas overexpression of activated IkappaB kinase beta (IKK ) in skeletal muscle
promotes potent muscle wasting mediated, at least in part, by the ubiquitin-ligase MuRF1 [120].
Moreover, the cytokine TNF-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK) and its receptor Fn14 are
also upregulated during muscle disuse [ 155,156], and mice lacking TWEAK are resistant to denervation.
TWEAK–Fn14 regulates TRAF6 action, which coordinates the degradation of proteins and organelles
via the proteasome and autophagy systems by activating NF- B, AMPK, and FoxO catabolic signaling
pathways [ 81]. In addition, a gene proﬁling study identiﬁed that the long noncoding RNA Atrolnc-1 is
highly induced in cachectic muscle, which enhances NF- B activity and MuRF1 transcription. Atrolnc-1
expression increases progressively in fasting mice and mice with chronic diseases such as cancer and
kidney disease. In muscle cells, overexpression of Atrolnc-1 enhances protein breakdown while its
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 14 of 28
suppression reduces serum starvation-induced proteolysis and attenuates muscle wasting in mice with
chronic kidney disease [157].
Stat3 is another transcription factor that is activated by pro-inﬂammatory cytokines TNF , IL6,
and IL1. IL6 induces Stat3 phosphorylation by JAK, which promotes its nuclear localization and
target gene expression under various atrophic conditions including cancer cachexia and sepsis [ 158].
Moreover, Stat3 activation appears to be both su cient and required for muscle wasting [ 86,158,159].
Thus, inﬂammatory cytokines can contribute, or altogether induce, muscle wasting through the
activation of pro-atrophy transcription factors NF- B and Stat3.
4.3. HDAC4–Myogenin Axis
HDAC4 is a class IIa histone deacetylase that translates neural activity into actionable gene
transcription within skeletal muscle [ 160]. In response to denervation, HDAC4 is dramatically
upregulated and translocates from the neuromuscular junction to the nucleus. There, HDAC4 regulates
the activity of E-box-binding basic helix-loop-helix muscle-speciﬁc transcription factor known as
myogenin through the transcriptional repressor Dach2 [ 161]. Myogenin controls the expression of
genes important for neuromuscular synapse formation, such as MuSK and nAChRs, which tend to
be re-expressed in denervated, and neuromuscular disease-inﬂicted muscle. The upregulation of
HDAC4, its close relative HDAC5, and myogenin following denervation culminates in increased
expression of atrogenes MuRF1 and Atrogin-1 [ 162]. On the other hand, loss of either myogenin or
HDAC4 /5 during denervation diminishes the expression of Atrogin-1 and MuRF1 and attenuates
muscle atrophy induced by denervation [ 160,162]. Postnatal deletion of HDAC4 in mice is protective
against denervation-induced atrophy. HDAC4 also mediates induction of growth arrest and DNA
damage-inducible 45 (Gadd45a), a small myonuclear protein that is required for denervation-induced
muscle atrophy. A recent study, which aimed at uncovering additional HDAC4 substrates in skeletal
muscle, identiﬁed myosin heavy chain, PGC-1 , and heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein (Hsc70) to
all be regulated by HDAC4 [ 163]. Thus, HDAC4 is an important regulator of muscle trophism in
denervation and NMJ disorders, but more research is required to better understand its signaling
network and mechanism of action within skeletal muscle.
4.4. UPR
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular stress response system that is activated when
unfolded or misfolded proteins accumulate in the lumen of the ER, causing ER stress. The ultimate goal
of this mechanism is to restore cellular homeostasis by reducing protein translation, increasing protein
degradation, and boosting ER folding capacity. Evidence implicating this process in the regulation of
muscle atrophy have been mounting, and various factors involved in the UPR have been documented
to promote muscle atrophy. For instance, UPR-related transcription factor ATF4 is activated in response
to decreased protein translation stemming from unfolded protein-induced recruitment of GPR78 /Bip
and activation of PERK, a kinase that phosphorylates the initiation factor eIF2 and reduces ribosome
assembly and protein synthesis. ATF4 contributes to muscle atrophy by modulating growth arrest
and DNA damage-inducible 45a (Gadd45a), among others, in response to fasting, immobilization,
and denervation [ 164,165]. Gadd45a induces nuclear remodeling by repressing genes involved in
anabolic signaling and energy production such as PGC-1 and Akt, and induces pro-atrophy genes
including autophagy and caspase-related genes [ 166–169]. Interestingly, loss of PERK either in vitro or
in vivo counterintuitively results in the upregulation of autophagy lysosome, calpain, and ubiquitin
proteasome genes, culminating in muscle atrophy [ 170]. However, the mechanisms of this e ect are
unclear and are not likely related to its role in activating ATF4.
Another branch of the UPR has also recently been implicated in muscle wasting. Depletion of
GRP/Bip due to unfolded proteins in the ER activates IRE, which induces the activity of transcription
factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), resulting in atrophy. Targeted ablation of XBP1 in muscle
ameliorates muscle loss in tumor-bearing mice, while its overexpression promotes atrophy of cultured
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 15 of 28
myotubes [ 171]. This study also demonstrated that XBP1 is activated by toll-like receptor (TLR) and
myeloid di erentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) signaling in tumor-bearing mice.
UPR pathways are activated in response to a myriad of catabolic conditions including models of
mitochondrial dysfunction, which are characterized by muscle atrophy. For instance, acute deletion of
mitochondrial fusion protein OPA1 or the ﬁssion protein DRP1 in skeletal muscle result not only in
dysfunctional mitochondria, but also exhibit UPR activation [ 172,173] and loss of muscle mass, albeit
by di erent mechanisms.
4.5. miRs
Finally, microRNAs (miRs) have also been documented to regulate muscle mass during disuse.
MiRs are endogenous, noncoding, short (20–22 nucleotides) RNAs that are involved in a wide variety
of cellular processes. These miRs recognize the 30-untranslated regions of their target substrates and
silence their expression by either inducing transcript degradation or by blocking translation. Atrophic
conditions such as denervation, starvation, cancer cachexia, or aging result in altered miR expression
proﬁles. For instance miR-206 and -21 are induced with denervation and are both su cient and
required for atrophy [ 174]. miR-182, on the other hand, targets FoxO3, thus attenuating atrophy-related
gene expression [ 175]. Indeed, miR-182 levels are reduced in response to some atrophic stimuli.
Additional miRs associated with muscle disuse include miR-1 and miR-133a, both of which are reduced
with bed rest and denervation [176,177].
A recent study in pre- and post-natal swine suggested that TGF is a potential target of miR-21
and that mRNA expression levels of miR-21 and TGF I are negatively correlated during muscle
development. Moreover, miR-21 is involved in muscle development by regulating PI3K–Akt–mTOR
signaling through TGF I [178].
TNFand IGF-1 have also been demonstrated to regulate miR expression during skeletal muscle
dierentiation in vitro , wherein miRs, in turn, reduced myoblast fusion capacity by targeting genes
associated with axon guidance, MAPK signaling, focal adhesion, and neurotrophin signaling pathways.
Inhibition of miR-155 in combination with overexpression of miR-503 partially abrogates the inhibitory
eect of TNFon myotube formation. Therefore, the inhibitory e ects of TNFor the growth promoting
eects of IGF-1 on skeletal muscle di erentiation include the deregulation of known muscle-regulatory
miRs [179].
Altogether, it is evident that the transcriptional regulation of muscle atrophy is important for both
induction and continuity of proteolysis. This regulation depends on the interplay between a wide
range of pathways, which often converge on the transcription of common atrophic factors known
as atrogenes.
5. Metabolic Regulators of Muscle Mass
Changes in muscle mass are often accompanied by alterations in cellular bioenergetics and
metabolism, which can be both the cause and the e ect. Indeed, protein synthesis accounts for almost
30% of cellular ATP consumption and therefore any alterations in protein synthesis have a strong
inﬂuence and reliance on energy supply and demand within the cell. Moreover, alterations in fuel
availability also e ect cellular energetics and by that notion may impact protein synthesis. For instance,
alterations in lipid composition due to depletion of Perilipin2, a protein involved in lipid storage,
result in muscle hypertrophy and protection from denervation-induced atrophy [ 180]. This e ect was
independent of mTOR signaling.
Reductions in mitochondrial content and changes in organelle morphology are common among
various types of atrophy, and atrophying muscles are characterized by both reduced mitochondrial
biogenesis and increased mitochondrial elimination. For instance, 7 days of denervation result in a ~50%
drop in mitochondrial density, which correlates closely with loss of muscle mass [ 181]. Interestingly,
the decrease in mitochondrial content precedes atrophy, suggesting that organelle loss contributes to
the decline in muscle mass. However, causality has not been directly determined.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 16 of 28
The level of the mitochondrial master regulator PGC-1 and close family member PGC-1 
plummet under various atrophic conditions including diabetes, renal failure, cancer cachexia,
and denervation [144,182–184] . This drop closely correlates with diminished organelle biogenesis [183–187] .
Moreover, overexpression of either PGC-1 or -blocks protein degradation and spares muscle mass
during a number of atrophic conditions [ 144,145]; however, this is not sufficient to induce protein synthesis
or muscle hypertrophy on its own. Various spliced isoforms of PGC-1 have been identified as playing
different roles in the regulation of muscle mass. PGC-1 isoform 4 (PGC-1 4), for instance, can promote
muscle growth by inducing IGF-1 and repressing myostatin signaling [ 188]. Moreover, PGC-1 4
expression is preferentially enhanced during resistance exercise, and mice with transgenic expression of
this isoform have increased muscle mass and strength, and are resistant to atrophic stimuli. The anabolic
effects of PGC-1 4 are dependent on GPR56, and knockdown of GPR56 attenuates PGC-1 4-induced
muscle hypertrophy in vitro . Consistently , forced expression of GPR56 resulted in myotube hypertrophy
through increased expression of IGF-1 [189].
Muscle atrophy is also accompanied by alterations in mitochondrial morphology [ 108,190].
Indeed, reduced levels of fusion proteins MFN2 and OPA1 with denervation result in fragmented
mitochondria [ 190]. Small punctate mitochondria are less e cient at ATP production, more prone to
ROS generation, as well as apoptosis, and are therefore predisposed for elimination by autophagy, all of
which add to atrophy. Consistently, genetic deletion of OPA1 in skeletal muscle results in oxidative
stress, which initiates an inﬂammatory response and premature cellular senescence culminating in a
FoxO-dependent atrophy program and premature death [ 172]. The ablation of ﬁssion protein DRP1,
on the other hand, does not appear to a ect lifespan, but impacts calcium homeostasis by disrupting
mitochondria–ER tethering, which results in mitochondrial calcium overload and reduced muscle
strength [ 173]. Moreover, the overexpression of ﬁssion protein Fis1 is su cient to induce muscle
atrophy [ 191], which can be reversed if the mitochondrial network is restored [ 191]. Interestingly,
two wrongs appear to make a right where concomitant ablation of both OPA1 and DRP1 mitigates the
eect of OPA1 inhibition, resulting in a less severe mixed phenotype [ 192]. These ﬁndings underline
the importance of balanced mitochondrial ﬁssion and fusion to muscle health [172,193].
An increasing number of factors that impinge on mitochondrial function are emerging as
mediators of muscle atrophy. For instance, cytokine FGF21 promotes muscle loss by increasing
Bnip3-dependant mitophagy [ 44]. However, the mechanism behind this regulation remains unknown.
Casein kinase 2 (CK2) is an enzyme responsible for the phosphorylation mitochondrial import channel
translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 22 (TOM22); this phosphorylation is mandatory for proper
mitochondrial protein import. Deletion of CK2 in mouse muscle results in reduced strength, abnormal
metabolism, and accumulation of PINK1. PINK1 is a mitochondrial health sensor that is typically
imported into the mitochondria and degraded. Accumulation of PINK1 on the mitochondrial membrane
induces mitophagy by recruiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin, which ubiquitinates mitochondrial
membrane proteins, e ectively tagging the organelle for degradation. In muscles lacking CK2,
autophagy ﬂux is impaired, resulting in accumulation of undegraded materials and myopathy [194].
ATP citrate lyase (ACL) is a cytosolic enzyme that catalyzes mitochondria-derived citrate into
oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA. This enzyme appears to at least in part mediate IGF-1-induced muscle
hypertrophy by increasing cardiolipin, and optimizing the activity of mitochondrial complexes and
supercomplex. Thus, ACL may be acting as the molecular liaison between IGF-1-induced anabolic
signaling (increasing energetic demand) and the activation of energy-producing mechanisms needed to
supply the required ATP (increasing energy supply) [ 195]. However, the role of ACL does not end there;
it also moonlights in myogenesis by regulating MYOD [ 196]. Furthermore, pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase 4 (PDK4), an important metabolic regulator, is elevated in several atrophic conditions including
cancer, starvation, diabetes, and sepsis. Overexpression of PDK4 in myotubes promotes myoﬁber
atrophy and mitochondrial abnormalities, whereas its blockage rescues myotube size in cells exposed
to tumor conditioned media [197].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 17 of 28
Consistently, the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) also positively regulates muscle
mass [ 198]. Findings from a recent study demonstrate that overexpression of MCU can rescue muscle
from denervation-induced atrophy by modulating PGC-1 4 and IGF-1-Akt signaling [199].
Therefore, mitochondrial ATP production, morphology, as well as signaling all inﬂuence muscle
metabolic state. This is not surprising, given the important role mitochondria play in energy provision
and the importance of ATP to muscle growth.
6. The Muscle Microenvironment and Stem Cell Niche
The idea that muscle is heavily inﬂuenced by its milieu is not new, and factors ranging from
nutrients and metabolites to ions and cytokines appear to play a major role in cellular signaling and
decision-making processes. It has been known for quite some time that malignant cells release atrophic
factors and cytokines that a ect muscle mass leading to cachexia. Among the various cytokines
released by cancer cells, myostatin and activins have the greatest impact on skeletal muscle mass.
Both are members of the TGF superfamily and contribute to cachexia by engaging Activin type I
(Alk) and type II (ActRIIB) receptors, culminating in the expression of atrogenes [ 60] and muscle
wasting. Indeed, genetically or biochemically interfering with these factors or their downstream
targets is protective of muscle mass. Recently, tumor-derived Act-A was demonstrated to induce the
expression of Twist1, a transcription factor important for mesenchymal stem cell fate determination.
Induction of Twist1, in turn, drives expression of MuRF1 and Atrogin-1, leading to muscle protein
degradation [ 200]. Genetic or pharmacological inactivation of Twist1 was su cient to reverse muscle
cachexia and improve survival in several genetic mouse models of cancer cachexia.
Cancer cells release not only cytokines but also extracellular vesicles (EVs). A recent study found
these vesicles to carry chaperone proteins HSP70 and HSP90, which upon arrival into muscle activate
TLR4, thereby inducing catabolism and contributing to cachexia [201].
Muscle wasting and cachexia are not only the result of increased muscle breakdown, but also
a decreased repair capacity by satellite cells. Some recent studies provide insights into how the
muscle stem cell niche and microenvironment contribute to the regulation of muscle mass [ 202].
This concept is perhaps best illustrated in tumor-bearing mice and oncology patients, where muscle
cachexia is associated with impaired di erentiation and incorporation of both satellite and non-satellite
muscle progenitors. Although these cells are activated with cachexia, they are unable to completely
dierentiate due to persistent expression of the self-renewal factor Pax7, which is mediated by NF- B.
Overexpression of Pax7 alone induces atrophy in normal muscle, while its blockade reverses muscle
wasting in tumor-bearing mice by restoring satellite cell function [ 203]. Another cell population
that has been documented to contribute to muscle wasting with denervation is the ﬁbro-adipogenic
progenitors (FAPs). Like other muscle progenitors, these cells are activated following muscle injury.
FAPs progressively accumulate following denervation, and FAPs from denervated muscles exhibit
functional properties and gene expression proﬁles that are distinct from those obtained from muscles
regenerating following cardiotoxin injury. FAPs activated by denervation or other pathological
conditions such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) exhibited
increased Stat3–IL6 signaling, which promoted muscle atrophy and ﬁbrosis. Inactivation of this
pathway was su cient to counteract muscle atrophy and ﬁbrosis in these atrophic models [204].
7. Conclusions
Although substantial progress has been made in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms
that control muscle mass, we are still far from having the whole picture. The lack of viable treatments
for muscle wasting conditions both as primary and secondary morbidities are perhaps the strongest
testament to this. The importance of healthy muscle to whole body homeostasis and the vigor of
other organs during health and disease brings muscle research to the forefront. We therefore must
continue to unravel the mechanisms underlying muscle atrophy in their entirety to reveal their
complexity. Moreover, our most common mediums for studying muscle atrophy rely on rodent and
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 18 of 28
cell culture models, the ﬁndings from which do not appear to translate well to humans, thus delaying
therapeutic development. Indeed, many therapeutic targets that seem promising in the lab, despite
many e orts, never make it to the bedside. More rigorous testing must therefore be performed on
potential therapeutic targets, along with increased e orts for developing models that better mimic
human muscle behavior.
Funding: This work was supported from the ASI (MARS-PRE), AFM-Telethon (19524), AIRC (17388 and 23257),
and H2020-MSCA-RISE-2014 project no. 645648 “Muscle Stress Relief”.
Conﬂicts of Interest: Anna Vainshtein is a co-founder of Craft Science Inc., in which she holds shares. The sponsors
had no role in the writing of this article or the decision to submit it for publication.
References
1. Baskin, K.K.; Winders, B.R.; Olson, E.N. Muscle as a “mediator” of systemic metabolism. Cell Metab. 2015 ,
21, 237–248. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Karstoft, K.; Pedersen, B.K. Skeletal muscle as a gene regulatory endocrine organ. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr.
Metab. Care 2016 ,19, 270–275. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Demontis, F.; Piccirillo, R.; Goldberg, A.L.; Perrimon, N. The inﬂuence of skeletal muscle on systemic aging
and lifespan. Aging Cell 2013 ,12, 943–949. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Tang, H.; Inoki, K.; Lee, M.; Wright, E.; Khuong, A.A.; Khuong, A.A.; Sugiarto, S.; Garner, M.; Paik, J.;
DePinho, R.A.; et al. mTORC1 promotes denervation-induced muscle atrophy through a mechanism
involving the activation of FoxO and E3 ubiquitin ligases. Sci. Signal. 2014 ,7, ra18. [CrossRef]
5. Quy, P .N.; Kuma, A.; Pierre, P .; Mizushima, N. Proteasome-dependent activation of mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is essential for autophagy suppression and muscle remodeling following
denervation. J. Biol. Chem. 2013 ,288, 1125–1134. [CrossRef]
6. Tam, B.T.; Pei, X.M.; Yung, B.Y.; Yip, S.P .; Chan, L.W.; Wong, C.S.; Siu, P .M. Autophagic Adaptations to
Long-term Habitual Exercise in Cardiac Muscle. Int. J. Sports Med. 2015 . [CrossRef]
7. Lira, V .A.; Okutsu, M.; Zhang, M.; Greene, N.P .; Laker, R.C.; Breen, D.S.; Hoehn, K.L.; Yan, Z. Autophagy is
required for exercise training-induced skeletal muscle adaptation and improvement of physical performance.
FASEB J. 2013 ,27, 4184–4193. [CrossRef]
8. Vainshtein, A.; Tryon, L.D.; Pauly, M.; Hood, D.A. The role of PGC-1 during acute exercise-induced
autophagy and mitophagy in skeletal muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2015 . [CrossRef]
9. Masschelein, E.; Van Thienen, R.; D’Hulst, G.; Hespel, P .; Thomis, M.; Deldicque, L. Acute environmental
hypoxia induces LC3 lipidation in a genotype-dependent manner. FASEB J. 2013 ,28, 1022–1034. [CrossRef]
10. Schia no, S.; Dyar, K.A.; Ciciliot, S.; Blaauw, B.; Sandri, M. Mechanisms regulating skeletal muscle growth
and atrophy. FEBS J. 2013 ,280, 4294–4314. [CrossRef]
11. Liu, G.Y .; Sabatini, D.M. mTOR at the nexus of nutrition, growth, ageing and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2020 .
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Risson, V .; Mazelin, L.; Roceri, M.; Sanchez, H.; Moncollin, V .; Corneloup, C.; Richard-Bulteau, H.; Vignaud, A.;
Baas, D.; Defour, A.; et al. Muscle inactivation of mTOR causes metabolic and dystrophin defects leading to
severe myopathy. J. Cell Biol. 2009 ,187, 859–874. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Von Walden, F.; Liu, C.; Aurigemma, N.; Nader, G.A. mTOR signaling regulates myotube hypertrophy by
modulating protein synthesis, rDNA transcription, and chromatin remodeling. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.
2016 ,311, C663–C672. [CrossRef]
14. Zhao, J.; Zhai, B.; Gygi, S.P .; Goldberg, A.L. mTOR inhibition activates overall protein degradation by the
ubiquitin proteasome system as well as by autophagy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015 ,112, 15790–15797.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Kumar, A.; Harris, T.E.; Keller, S.R.; Choi, K.M.; Magnuson, M.A.; Lawrence, J.C. Muscle-Speciﬁc Deletion
of Rictor Impairs Insulin-Stimulated Glucose Transport and Enhances Basal Glycogen Synthase Activity.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 2008 ,28, 61–70. [CrossRef]
16. You, J.-S.; McNally, R.M.; Jacobs, B.L.; Privett, R.E.; Gundermann, D.M.; Lin, K.-H.; Steinert, N.D.;
Goodman, C.A.; Hornberger, T.A. The role of raptor in the mechanical load-induced regulation of mTOR
signaling, protein synthesis, and skeletal muscle hypertrophy. FASEB J. 2019 ,33, 4021–4034. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 19 of 28
17. Zhang, Q.; Duplany, A.; Moncollin, V .; Mouradian, S.; Goillot, E.; Mazelin, L.; Gauthier, K.; Streichenberger, N.;
Angleraux, C.; Chen, J.; et al. Lack of muscle mTOR kinase activity causes early onset myopathy and
compromises whole-body homeostasis. J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle 2019 ,10, 35–53. [CrossRef]
18. Lim, J.; Li, L.; Shirihai, O.S.; Trudeau, K.M.; Puertollano, R.; Raben, N. Modulation of mTOR signaling as a
strategy for the treatment of Pompe disease. EMBO Mol. Med. 2017 ,9, 353–370. [CrossRef]
19. Ching, J.K.; Elizabeth, S.V .; Ju, J.-S.; Lusk, C.; Pittman, S.K.; Weihl, C.C. mTOR dysfunction contributes
to vacuolar pathology and weakness in valosin-containing protein associated inclusion body myopathy.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 2013 ,22, 1167–1179. [CrossRef]
20. Goodman, C.A.; Miu, M.H.; Frey, J.W.; Mabrey, D.M.; Lincoln, H.C.; Ge, Y.; Chen, J.; Hornberger, T.A.
A phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase /protein kinase B-independent activation of mammalian target of rapamycin
signaling is su cient to induce skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Mol. Biol. Cell 2010 ,21, 3258–3268. [CrossRef]
21. Bentzinger, C.F.; Lin, S.; Romanino, K.; Castets, P .; Guridi, M.; Summermatter, S.; Handschin, C.;
Tintignac, L.A.; Hall, M.N.; Rüegg, M.A. Di erential response of skeletal muscles to mTORC1 signaling
during atrophy and hypertrophy. Skelet. Muscle 2013 ,3, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Castets, P .; Lin, S.; Rion, N.; Di Fulvio, S.; Romanino, K.; Guridi, M.; Frank, S.; Tintignac, L.A.; Sinnreich, M.;
Rüegg, M.A. Sustained activation of mTORC1 in skeletal muscle inhibits constitutive and starvation-induced
autophagy and causes a severe, late-onset myopathy. Cell Metab. 2013 ,17, 731–744. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. You, J.S.; Anderson, G.B.; Dooley, M.S.; Hornberger, T.A. The role of mTOR signaling in the regulation
of protein synthesis and muscle mass during immobilization in mice. DMM Dis. Model. Mech. 2015 ,8,
1059–1069. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Tang, H.; Inoki, K.; Brooks, S.V .; Okazawa, H.; Lee, M.; Wang, J.; Kim, M.; Kennedy, C.L.; Macpherson, P .C.D.;
Ji, X.; et al. mTORC1 underlies age-related muscle ﬁber damage and loss by inducing oxidative stress and
catabolism. Aging Cell 2019 ,18, e12943. [CrossRef]
25. Joseph, G.A.; Wang, S.X.; Jacobs, C.E.; Zhou, W.; Kimble, G.C.; Tse, H.W.; Eash, J.K.; Shavlakadze, T.;
Glass, D.J. Partial Inhibition of mTORC1 in Aged Rats Counteracts the Decline in Muscle Mass and Reverses
Molecular Signaling Associated with Sarcopenia. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2019 ,39. [CrossRef]
26. Carnio, S.; LoVerso, F.; Baraibar, M.A.; Longa, E.; Khan, M.M.; Ma ei, M.; Reischl, M.; Canepari, M.;
Loeﬂer, S.; Kern, H.; et al. Autophagy impairment in muscle induces neuromuscular junction degeneration
and precocious aging. Cell Rep. 2014 ,8, 1509–1521. [CrossRef]
27. Verhees, K.J.P .; Schols, A.M.W.J.; Kelders, M.C.J.M.; den Kamp, C.M.H.O.; van der Velden, J.L.J.; Langen, R.C.J.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 is required for the induction of skeletal muscle atrophy. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 2011 ,301, C995–C1007. [CrossRef]
28. Pansters, N.A.M.; Schols, A.M.W.J.; Verhees, K.J.P .; de Theije, C.C.; Snepvangers, F.J.; Kelders, M.C.J.M.;
Ubags, N.D.J.; Haegens, A.; Langen, R.C.J. Muscle-speciﬁc GSK-3 ablation accelerates regeneration of
disuse-atrophied skeletal muscle. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 2015 ,1852 , 490–506. [CrossRef]
29. Theeuwes, W.F.; Gosker, H.R.; Langen, R.C.J.; Verhees, K.J.P .; Pansters, N.A.M.; Schols, A.M.W.J.;
Remels, A.H.V . Inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) enhances skeletal muscle oxidative
metabolism. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 2017 ,1863 , 3075–3086. [CrossRef]
30. Bodine, S.C.; Stitt, T.N.; Gonzalez, M.; Kline, W.O.; Stover, G.L.; Bauerlein, R.; Zlotchenko, E.; Scrimgeour, A.;
Lawrence, J.C.; Glass, D.J.; et al. Akt /mTOR pathway is a crucial regulator of skeletal muscle hypertrophy
and can prevent muscle atrophy in vivo. Nat. Cell Biol. 2001 ,3, 1014–1019. [CrossRef]
31. Brunet, A.; Bonni, A.; Zigmond, M.J.; Lin, M.Z.; Juo, P .; Hu, L.S.; Anderson, M.J.; Arden, K.C.; Blenis, J.;
Greenberg, M.E. Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription
factor. Cell1999 ,96, 857–868. [CrossRef]
32. Skurk, C.; Izumiya, Y.; Maatz, H.; Razeghi, P .; Shiojima, I.; Sandri, M.; Sato, K.; Zeng, L.; Schiekofer, S.;
Pimentel, D.; et al. The FOXO3a transcription factor regulates cardiac myocyte size downstream of AKT
signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 2005 ,280, 20814–20823. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Kim, J.; Kundu, M.; Viollet, B.; Guan, K.-L. AMPK and mTOR regulate autophagy through direct
phosphorylation of Ulk1. Nat. Cell Biol. 2011 ,13, 132–141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Hosokawa, N.; Hara, T.; Kaizuka, T.; Kishi, C.; Takamura, A.; Miura, Y.; Iemura, S.; Natsume, T.; Takehana, K.;
Yamada, N.; et al. Nutrient-dependent mTORC1 association with the ULK1-Atg13-FIP200 complex required
for autophagy. Mol. Biol. Cell 2009 ,20, 1981–1991. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 20 of 28
35. Pelosi, M.; Alf ò, M.; Martella, F.; Pappalardo, E.; Musar ò, A. Finite mixture clustering of human tissues with
dierent levels of IGF-1 splice variants mRNA transcripts. BMC Bioinformatics 2015 ,16, 289. [CrossRef]
36. Ascenzi, F.; Barberi, L.; Dobrowolny, G.; Villa Nova Bacurau, A.; Nicoletti, C.; Rizzuto, E.; Rosenthal, N.;
Scicchitano, B.M.; Musar ò, A. E ects of IGF-1 isoforms on muscle growth and sarcopenia. Aging Cell 2019 ,
18, e12954. [CrossRef]
37. O’Neill, B.T.; Lee, K.Y.; Klaus, K.; Softic, S.; Krumpoch, M.T.; Fentz, J.; Stanford, K.I.; Robinson, M.M.; Cai, W.;
Kleinridders, A.; et al. Insulin and IGF-1 receptors regulate FoxO-mediated signaling in muscle proteostasis.
J. Clin. Invest. 2016 ,126, 3433–3446. [CrossRef]
38. Cohen, S.; Lee, D.; Zhai, B.; Gygi, S.P .; Goldberg, A.L. Trim32 reduces PI3K-Akt-FoxO signaling in muscle
atrophy by promoting plakoglobin-PI3K dissociation. J. Cell Biol. 2014 ,204, 747–758. [CrossRef]
39. Kline, W.O.; Panaro, F.J.; Yang, H.; Bodine, S.C. Rapamycin inhibits the growth and muscle-sparing e ects of
clenbuterol. J. Appl. Physiol. 2007 ,102, 740–747. [CrossRef]
40. Gonçalves, D.A.; Silveira, W.A.; Manfredi, L.H.; Graça, F.A.; Armani, A.; Bertaggia, E.; O’Neill, B.T.;
Lautherbach, N.; Machado, J.; Nogara, L.; et al. Insulin /IGF1 signalling mediates the e ects of2-adrenergic
agonist on muscle proteostasis and growth. J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle 2019 ,10, 455–475. [CrossRef]
41. Raaello, A.; Milan, G.; Masiero, E.; Carnio, S.; Lee, D.; Lanfranchi, G.; Goldberg, A.L.; Sandri, M.
JunB transcription factor maintains skeletal muscle mass and promotes hypertrophy. J. Cell Biol. 2010 ,191,
101–113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Pawlikowski, B.; Vogler, T.O.; Gadek, K.; Olwin, B.B. Regulation of skeletal muscle stem cells by ﬁbroblast
growth factors. Dev. Dyn. 2017 ,246, 359–367. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Benoit, B.; Meugnier, E.; Castelli, M.; Chanon, S.; Vieille-Marchiset, A.; Durand, C.; Bendridi, N.; Pesenti, S.;
Monternier, P .A.; Durieux, A.C.; et al. Fibroblast growth factor 19 regulates skeletal muscle mass and
ameliorates muscle wasting in mice. Nat. Med. 2017 ,23, 990–996. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Oost, L.J.; Kustermann, M.; Armani, A.; Blaauw, B.; Romanello, V . Fibroblast growth factor 21 controls
mitophagy and muscle mass. J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle 2019 ,10, 630–642. [CrossRef]
45. Ji, K.; Zheng, J.; Lv, J.; Xu, J.; Ji, X.; Luo, Y.B.; Li, W.; Zhao, Y.; Yan, C. Skeletal muscle increases FGF21
expression in mitochondrial disorders to compensate for energy metabolic insu ciency by activating the
mTOR-YY1-PGC1 pathway. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2015 ,84, 161–170. [CrossRef]
46. Ravel-Chapuis, A.; B élanger, G.; C ôté, J.; Michel, R.N.; Jasmin, B.J. Misregulation of calcium-handling proteins
promotes hyperactivation of calcineurin-NFAT signaling in skeletal muscle of DM1 mice. Hum. Mol. Genet.
2017 ,26, 2192–2206. [CrossRef]
47. Wang, G.; Biswas, A.K.; Ma, W.; Kandpal, M.; Coker, C.; Grandgenett, P .M.; Hollingsworth, M.A.; Jain, R.;
Tanji, K.; L ópez-Pintado, S.; et al. Metastatic cancers promote cachexia through ZIP14 upregulation in skeletal
muscle. Nat. Med. 2018 ,24, 770–781. [CrossRef]
48. Summermatter, S.; Bouzan, A.; Pierrel, E.; Melly, S.; Stau er, D.; Gutzwiller, S.; Nolin, E.; Dornelas, C.;
Fryer, C.; Leighton-Davies, J.; et al. Blockade of Metallothioneins 1 and 2 Increases Skeletal Muscle Mass and
Strength. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2017 ,37. [CrossRef]
49. McPherron, A.C.; Lawler, A.M.; Lee, S.J. Regulation of skeletal muscle mass in mice by a new TGF-beta
superfamily member. Nature 1997 ,387, 83–90. [CrossRef]
50. Lee, S.-J. Regulation of muscle mass by myostatin. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2004 ,20, 61–86. [CrossRef]
51. McPherron, A.C.; Lee, S.J. Double muscling in cattle due to mutations in the myostatin gene. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 1997 ,94, 12457–12461. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Sartori, R.; Milan, G.; Patron, M.; Mammucari, C.; Blaauw, B.; Abraham, R.; Sandri, M. Smad2 and 3
transcription factors control muscle mass in adulthood. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2009 ,296, C1248–C1257.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Taylor, W.E.; Bhasin, S.; Artaza, J.; Byhower, F.; Azam, M.; Willard, D.H.; Kull, F.C.; Gonzalez-Cadavid, N.
Myostatin inhibits cell proliferation and protein synthesis in C2C12 muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.
2001 ,280, E221–E228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Trendelenburg, A.U.; Meyer, A.; Rohner, D.; Boyle, J.; Hatakeyama, S.; Glass, D.J. Myostatin reduces
Akt/TORC1 /p70S6K signaling, inhibiting myoblast di erentiation and myotube size. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 2009 ,296, C1258–C1270. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 21 of 28
55. Winbanks, C.E.; Weeks, K.L.; Thomson, R.E.; Sepulveda, P .V .; Beyer, C.; Qian, H.; Chen, J.L.; Allen, A.M.;
Lancaster, G.I.; Febbraio, M.A.; et al. Follistatin-mediated skeletal muscle hypertrophy is regulated by Smad3
and mTOR independently of myostatin. J. Cell Biol. 2012 ,197, 997–1008. [CrossRef]
56. Goodman, C.A.; McNally, R.M.; Ho mann, F.M.; Hornberger, T.A. Smad3 induces atrogin-1, inhibits mTOR
and protein synthesis, and promotes muscle atrophy in vivo .Mol. Endocrinol. 2013 ,27, 1946–1957. [CrossRef]
57. Hitachi, K.; Nakatani, M.; Tsuchida, K. Myostatin signaling regulates Akt activity via the regulation of
miR-486 expression. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2014 ,47, 93–103. [CrossRef]
58. Tando, T.; Hirayama, A.; Furukawa, M.; Sato, Y.; Kobayashi, T.; Funayama, A.; Kanaji, A.; Hao, W.;
Watanabe, R.; Morita, M.; et al. Smad2 /3 proteins are required for immobilization-induced skeletal muscle
atrophy. J. Biol. Chem. 2016 ,291, 12184–12194. [CrossRef]
59. Sartori, R.; Schirwis, E.; Blaauw, B.; Bortolanza, S.; Zhao, J.; Enzo, E.; Stantzou, A.; Mouisel, E.; Toniolo, L.;
Ferry, A.; et al. BMP signaling controls muscle mass. Nat. Genet. 2013 ,45, 1309–1318. [CrossRef]
60. Sartori, R.; Gregorevic, P .; Sandri, M. TGF and BMP signaling in skeletal muscle: Potential signiﬁcance for
muscle-related disease. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2014 ,25, 464–471. [CrossRef]
61. Winbanks, C.E.; Chen, J.L.; Qian, H.; Liu, Y.; Bernardo, B.C.; Beyer, C.; Watt, K.I.; Thomson, R.E.; Connor, T.;
Turner, B.J.; et al. The bone morphogenetic protein axis is a positive regulator of skeletal muscle mass.
J. Cell Biol. 2013 ,203, 345–357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Zhou, X.; Wang, J.L.; Lu, J.; Song, Y.; Kwak, K.S.; Jiao, Q.; Rosenfeld, R.; Chen, Q.; Boone, T.; Simonet, W.S.;
et al. Reversal of cancer cachexia and muscle wasting by ActRIIB antagonism leads to prolonged survival.
Cell2010 ,142, 531–543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Winbanks, C.E.; Murphy, K.T.; Bernardo, B.C.; Qian, H.; Liu, Y.; Sepulveda, P .V .; Beyer, C.; Hagg, A.;
Thomson, R.E.; Chen, J.L.; et al. Smad7 gene delivery prevents muscle wasting associated with cancer
cachexia in mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 2016 ,8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Davey, J.R.; Watt, K.I.; Parker, B.L.; Chaudhuri, R.; Ryall, J.G.; Cunningham, L.; Qian, H.; Sartorelli, V .;
Sandri, M.; Chamberlain, J.; et al. Integrated expression analysis of muscle hypertrophy identiﬁes Asb2 as a
negative regulator of muscle mass. JCI Insight 2016 ,1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Wang, X.H.; Zhang, L.; Mitch, W.E.; LeDoux, J.M.; Hu, J.; Du, J. Caspase-3 cleaves speciﬁc 19 S proteasome
subunits in skeletal muscle stimulating proteasome activity. J. Biol. Chem. 2010 ,285, 21249–21257. [CrossRef]
66. Tischler, M.E.; Rosenberg, S.; Satarug, S.; Henriksen, E.J.; Kirby, C.R.; Tome, M.; Chase, P . Di erent mechanisms
of increased proteolysis in atrophy induced by denervation or unweighting of rat soleus muscle. Metabolism
1990 ,39, 756–763. [CrossRef]
67. Taillandier, D.; Aurousseau, E.; Meynial-Denis, D.; Bechet, D.; Ferrara, M.; Cottin, P .; Ducastaing, A.;
Bigard, X.; Guezennec, C.Y.; Schmid, H.P . Coordinate activation of lysosomal, Ca 2 +-activated and
ATP-ubiquitin-dependent proteinases in the unweighted rat soleus muscle. Biochem. J. 1996 ,316 Pt 1 ,
65–72. [CrossRef]
68. Lecker, S.H.; Jagoe, R.T.; Gilbert, A.; Gomes, M.; Baracos, V .; Bailey, J.; Price, S.R.; Mitch, W.E.; Goldberg, A.L.
Multiple types of skeletal muscle atrophy involve a common program of changes in gene expression. FASEB J.
2004 ,18, 39–51. [CrossRef]
69. Bodine, S.C.; Latres, E.; Baumhueter, S.; Lai, V .K.; Nunez, L.; Clarke, B.A.; Poueymirou, W.T.; Panaro, F.J.;
Na, E.; Dharmarajan, K.; et al. Identiﬁcation of ubiquitin ligases required for skeletal muscle atrophy. Science
2001 ,294, 1704–1708. [CrossRef]
70. Gomes, M.D.; Lecker, S.H.; Jagoe, R.T.; Navon, A.; Goldberg, A.L. Atrogin-1, a muscle-speciﬁc F-box protein
highly expressed during muscle atrophy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA 2001 ,98, 14440–14445. [CrossRef]
71. Aniort, J.; Stella, A.; Philipponnet, C.; Poyet, A.; Polge, C.; Claustre, A.; Combaret, L.; B échet, D.; Attaix, D.;
Boisgard, S.; et al. Muscle wasting in patients with end-stage renal disease or early-stage lung cancer:
Common mechanisms at work. J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle 2019 ,10, 323–337. [CrossRef]
72. Zaglia, T.; Milan, G.; Ruhs, A.; Franzoso, M.; Bertaggia, E.; Pianca, N.; Carpi, A.; Carullo, P .; Pesce, P .;
Sacerdoti, D.; et al. Atrogin-1 deﬁciency promotes cardiomyopathy and premature death via impaired
autophagy. J. Clin. Invest. 2014 ,124, 2410–2424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Cadena, S.M.; Zhang, Y.; Fang, J.; Brachat, S.; Kuss, P .; Giorgetti, E.; Stodieck, L.S.; Kneissel, M.; Glass, D.J.
Skeletal muscle in MuRF1 null mice is not spared in low-gravity conditions, indicating atrophy proceeds by
unique mechanisms in space. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 22 of 28
74. Baehr, L.M.; Furlow, J.D.; Bodine, S.C. Muscle sparing in muscle RING ﬁnger 1 null mice: Response to
synthetic glucocorticoids. J. Physiol. 2011 ,589, 4759–4776. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Hwee, D.T.; Baehr, L.M.; Philp, A.; Baar, K.; Bodine, S.C. Maintenance of muscle mass and load-induced
growth in Muscle RING Finger 1 null mice with age. Aging Cell 2014 ,13, 92–101. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Sandri, M.; Barberi, L.; Bijlsma, A.Y.; Blaauw, B.; Dyar, K.A.; Milan, G.; Mammucari, C.; Meskers, C.G.M.;
Pallafacchina, G.; Paoli, A.; et al. Signalling pathways regulating muscle mass in ageing skeletal muscle. the
role of the IGF1-Akt-mTOR-FoxO pathway. Biogerontology 2013 ,14, 303–323. [CrossRef]
77. Gomes, A.V .; Waddell, D.S.; Siu, R.; Stein, M.; Dewey, S.; Furlow, J.D.; Bodine, S.C. Upregulation of proteasome
activity in muscle RING ﬁnger 1-null mice following denervation. FASEB J. 2012 ,26, 2986–2999. [CrossRef]
78. Cong, H.; Sun, L.; Liu, C.; Tien, P . Inhibition of atrogin-1 /MAFbx expression by adenovirus-delivered small
hairpin RNAs attenuates muscle atrophy in fasting mice. Hum. Gene Ther. 2011 ,22, 313–324. [CrossRef]
79. Cohen, S.; Zhai, B.; Gygi, S.P .; Goldberg, A.L. Ubiquitylation by Trim32 causes coupled loss of desmin,
Z-bands, and thin ﬁlaments in muscle atrophy. J. Cell Biol. 2012 ,198, 575–589. [CrossRef]
80. Di Rienzo, M.; Antonioli, M.; Fusco, C.; Liu, Y.; Mari, M.; Orhon, I.; Refolo, G.; Germani, F.; Corazzari, M.;
Romagnoli, A.; et al. Autophagy induction in atrophic muscle cells requires ULK1 activation by TRIM32
through unanchored K63-linked polyubiquitin chains. Sci. Adv. 2019 ,5. [CrossRef]
81. Paul, P .K.; Gupta, S.K.; Bhatnagar, S.; Panguluri, S.K.; Darnay, B.G.; Choi, Y.; Kumar, A. Targeted ablation of
TRAF6 inhibits skeletal muscle wasting in mice. J. Cell Biol. 2010 ,191, 1395–1411. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Kirkin, V .; McEwan, D.G.; Novak, I.; Dikic, I. A role for ubiquitin in selective autophagy. Mol. Cell 2009 ,34,
259–269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Pankiv, S.; Clausen, T.H.; Lamark, T.; Brech, A.; Bruun, J.-A.; Outzen, H.; Øvervatn, A.; Bjørkøy, G.; Johansen, T.
p62/SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8 /LC3 to facilitate degradation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates by
autophagy. J. Biol. Chem. 2007 ,282, 24131–24145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Nazio, F.; Strappazzon, F.; Antonioli, M.; Bielli, P .; Cianfanelli, V .; Bordi, M.; Gretzmeier, C.; Dengjel, J.;
Piacentini, M.; Fimia, G.M.; et al. MTOR inhibits autophagy by controlling ULK1 ubiquitylation,
self-association and function through AMBRA1 and TRAF6. Nat. Cell Biol. 2013 ,15, 406–416. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
85. Milan, G.; Romanello, V .; Pescatore, F.; Armani, A.; Paik, J.-H.; Frasson, L.; Seydel, A.; Zhao, J.; Abraham, R.;
Goldberg, A.L.; et al. Regulation of autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system by the FoxO
transcriptional network during muscle atrophy. Nat. Commun. 2015 ,6, 6670. [CrossRef]
86. Judge, S.M.; Wu, C.L.; Beharry, A.W.; Roberts, B.M.; Ferreira, L.F.; Kandarian, S.C.; Judge, A.R. Genome-wide
identiﬁcation of FoxO-dependent gene networks in skeletal muscle during C26 cancer cachexia. BMC Cancer
2014 ,14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Cornwell, E.W.; Mirbod, A.; Wu, C.L.; Kandarian, S.C.; Jackman, R.W. C26 cancer-induced muscle wasting is
IKKb-dependent and NF-kappaB-independent. PLoS ONE 2014 ,9. [CrossRef]
88. Corpeno Kalamgi, R.; Salah, H.; Gastaldello, S.; Martinez-Redondo, V .; Ruas, J.L.; Fury, W.; Bai, Y.; Gromada, J.;
Sartori, R.; Guttridge, D.C.; et al. Mechano-signalling pathways in an experimental intensive critical illness
myopathy model. J. Physiol. 2016 ,594, 4371–4388. [CrossRef]
89. Combaret, L.; Adegoke, O.A.J.; Bedard, N.; Baracos, V .; Attaix, D.; Wing, S.S. USP19 is a ubiquitin-speciﬁc
protease regulated in rat skeletal muscle during catabolic states. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2005 ,288,
693–700. [CrossRef]
90. Bédard, N.; Jammoul, S.; Moore, T.; Wykes, L.; Hallauer, P .L.; Hastings, K.E.M.; Stretch, C.; Baracos, V .;
Chevalier, S.; Plourde, M.; et al. Inactivation of the ubiquitin-speciﬁc protease 19 deubiquitinating enzyme
protects against muscle wasting. FASEB J. 2015 ,29, 3889–3898. [CrossRef]
91. Sundaram, P .; Pang, Z.; Miao, M.; Yu, L.; Wing, S.S. USP19-deubiquitinating enzyme regulates levels of major
myoﬁbrillar proteins in L6 muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2009 ,297. [CrossRef]
92. Lee, D.; Takayama, S.; Goldberg, A.L. ZFAND5 /ZNF216 is an activator of the 26S proteasome that stimulates
overall protein degradation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018 ,115, E9550–E9559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Hishiya, A.; Iemura, S.I.; Natsume, T.; Takayama, S.; Ikeda, K.; Watanabe, K. A novel ubiquitin-binding
protein ZNF216 functioning in muscle atrophy. EMBO J. 2006 ,25, 554–564. [CrossRef]
94. VerPlank, J.J.S.; Lokireddy, S.; Zhao, J.; Goldberg, A.L. 26S Proteasomes are rapidly activated by diverse
hormones and physiological states that raise cAMP and cause Rpn6 phosphorylation. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2019 ,116, 4228–4237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 23 of 28
95. Hunt, L.C.; Stover, J.; Haugen, B.; Shaw, T.I.; Li, Y.; Pagala, V .R.; Finkelstein, D.; Barton, E.R.; Fan, Y.;
Labelle, M.; et al. A Key Role for the Ubiquitin Ligase UBR4 in Myoﬁber Hypertrophy in Drosophila and
Mice. Cell Rep. 2019 ,28, 1268–1281.e6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Mizushima, N.; Yamamoto, A.; Matsui, M.; Yoshimori, T.; Ohsumi, Y. In vivo analysis of autophagy in
response to nutrient starvation using transgenic mice expressing a ﬂuorescent autophagosome marker.
Mol. Biol. Cell 2004 ,15, 1101–1111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Mofarrahi, M.; Guo, Y.; Haspel, J.A.; Choi, A.M.K.; Davis, E.C.; Gouspillou, G.; Hepple, R.T.; Godin, R.;
Burelle, Y.; Hussain, S.N.A. Autophagic ﬂux and oxidative capacity of skeletal muscles during acute starvation.
Autophagy 2013 ,9, 1604–1620. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Dobrowolny, G.; Aucello, M.; Rizzuto, E.; Beccaﬁco, S.; Mammucari, C.; Boncompagni, S.; Belia, S.;
Wannenes, F.; Nicoletti, C.; Del Prete, Z.; et al. Skeletal muscle is a primary target of SOD1G93A-mediated
toxicity. Cell Metab. 2008 ,8, 425–436. [CrossRef]
99. Raben, N.; Hill, V .; Shea, L.; Takikita, S.; Baum, R.; Mizushima, N.; Ralston, E.; Plotz, P . Suppression of
autophagy in skeletal muscle uncovers the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and their potential role in
muscle damage in Pompe disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2008 ,17, 3897–3908. [CrossRef]
100. Masiero, E.; Agatea, L.; Mammucari, C.; Blaauw, B.; Loro, E.; Komatsu, M.; Metzger, D.; Reggiani, C.;
Schia no, S.; Sandri, M. Autophagy is required to maintain muscle mass. Cell Metab. 2009 ,10, 507–515.
[CrossRef]
101. Bujak, A.L.; Crane, J.D.; Lally, J.S.; Ford, R.J.; Kang, S.J.; Rebalka, I.A.; Green, A.E.; Kemp, B.E.; Hawke, T.J.;
Schertzer, J.D.; et al. AMPK activation of muscle autophagy prevents fasting-induced hypoglycemia and
myopathy during aging. Cell Metab. 2015 ,21, 883–890. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Nemazanyy, I.; Blaauw, B.; Paolini, C.; Caillaud, C.; Protasi, F.; Mueller, A.; Proikas-Cezanne, T.; Russell, R.C.;
Guan, K.-L.L.; Nishino, I.; et al. Defects of Vps15 in skeletal muscles lead to autophagic vacuolar myopathy
and lysosomal disease. EMBO Mol. Med. 2013 ,5, 870–890. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Fuqua, J.D.; Mere, C.P .; Kronemberger, A.; Blomme, J.; Bae, D.; Turner, K.D.; Harris, M.P .; Scudese, E.;
Edwards, M.; Ebert, S.M.; et al. ULK2 is essential for degradation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates and
homeostasis in skeletal muscle. FASEB J. 2019 ,33, 11735–12745. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Grumati, P .; Coletto, L.; Sabatelli, P .; Cescon, M.; Angelin, A.; Bertaggia, E.; Blaauw, B.; Urciuolo, A.;
Tiepolo, T.; Merlini, L.; et al. Autophagy is defective in collagen VI muscular dystrophies, and its reactivation
rescues myoﬁber degeneration. Nat. Med. 2010 ,16, 1313–1320. [CrossRef]
105. De Palma, C.; Morisi, F.; Cheli, S.; Pambianco, S.; Cappello, V .; Vezzoli, M.; Rovere-Querini, P .; Moggio, M.;
Ripolone, M.; Francolini, M.; et al. Autophagy as a new therapeutic target in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Cell Death Dis. 2012 ,3, e418. [CrossRef]
106. Pauly, M.; Daussin, F.; Burelle, Y.; Li, T.; Godin, R.; Fauconnier, J.; Koechlin-Ramonatxo, C.; Hugon, G.;
Lacampagne, A.; Coisy-Quivy, M.; et al. AMPK activation stimulates autophagy and ameliorates muscular
dystrophy in the mdx mouse diaphragm. Am. J. Pathol. 2012 ,181, 583–592. [CrossRef]
107. Sugie, K.; Noguchi, S.; Kozuka, Y.; Arikawa-Hirasawa, E.; Tanaka, M.; Yan, C.; Saftig, P .; von Figura, K.;
Hirano, M.; Ueno, S.; et al. Autophagic vacuoles with sarcolemmal features delineate Danon disease and
related myopathies. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 2005 ,64, 513–522. [CrossRef]
108. O’Leary, M.F.M.F.; Vainshtein, A.; Iqbal, S.; Ostojic, O.; Hood, D.A.D.A. Adaptive plasticity of autophagic
proteins to denervation in aging skeletal muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2013 ,304, C422–C430. [CrossRef]
109. Lo Verso, F.; Carnio, S.; Vainshtein, A.; Sandri, M.; LoVerso, F.; Carnio, S.; Vainshtein, A.; Sandri, M.
Autophagy is not required to sustain exercise and PRKAA1 /AMPK activity but is important to prevent
mitochondrial damage during physical activity. Autophagy 2014 ,10, 11. [CrossRef]
110. Castets, P .; Rion, N.; Th éodore, M.; Falcetta, D.; Lin, S.; Reischl, M.; Wild, F.; Gu érard, L.; Eickhorst, C.;
Brockho , M.; et al. mTORC1 and PKB /Akt control the muscle response to denervation by regulating
autophagy and HDAC4. Nat. Commun. 2019 ,10, 3187. [CrossRef]
111. García-Prat, L.; Mart ínez-Vicente, M.; Perdiguero, E.; Ortet, L.; Rodr íguez-Ubreva, J.; Rebollo, E.;
Ruiz-Bonilla, V .; Gutarra, S.; Ballestar, E.; Serrano, A.L.; et al. Autophagy maintains stemness by preventing
senescence. Nature 2016 ,529, 37–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Ryu, D.; Mouchiroud, L.; Andreux, P .A.; Katsyuba, E.; Moullan, N.; Nicolet-Dit-F élix, A.A.; Williams, E.G.;
Jha, P .; Lo Sasso, G.; Huzard, D.; et al. Urolithin A induces mitophagy and prolongs lifespan in C. elegans and
increases muscle function in rodents. Nat. Med. 2016 ,22, 879–888. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 24 of 28
113. Wohlgemuth, S.E.; Seo, A.Y.; Marzetti, E.; Lees, H.A.; Leeuwenburgh, C. Skeletal muscle autophagy and
apoptosis during aging: E ects of calorie restriction and life-long exercise. Exp. Gerontol. 2010 ,45, 138–148.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Piccirillo, R.; Goldberg, A.L. The p97 /VCP ATPase is critical in muscle atrophy and the accelerated degradation
of muscle proteins. EMBO J. 2012 ,31, 3334–3350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Wang, C.; Arrington, J.; Ratli , A.C.; Chen, J.; Horton, H.E.; Nie, Y.; Yue, F.; Hrycyna, C.A.; Andy Tao, W.;
Kuang, S. Methyltransferase-like 21c methylates and stabilizes the heat shock protein Hspa8 in type I
myoﬁbers in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 2019 ,294, 13718–13728. [CrossRef]
116. Wiederstein, J.L.; Nolte, H.; Günther, S.; Piller, T.; Baraldo, M.; Kostin, S.; Bloch, W.; Schindler, N.; Sandri, M.;
Blaauw, B.; et al. Skeletal Muscle-Speciﬁc Methyltransferase METTL21C Trimethylates p97 and Regulates
Autophagy-Associated Protein Breakdown. Cell Rep. 2018 ,23, 1342–1356. [CrossRef]
117. Zhao, J.; Brault, J.J.; Schild, A.; Cao, P .; Sandri, M.; Schiaffino, S.; Lecker, S.H.; Goldberg, A.L. FoxO3 coordinately
activates protein degradation by the autophagic /lysosomal and proteasomal pathways in atrophying muscle
cells. Cell Metab. 2007 ,6, 472–483. [CrossRef]
118. Sandri, M.; Sandri, C.; Gilbert, A.; Skurk, C.; Calabria, E.; Picard, A.; Walsh, K.; Schia no, S.; Lecker, S.H.;
Goldberg, A.L. Foxo transcription factors induce the atrophy-related ubiquitin ligase atrogin-1 and cause
skeletal muscle atrophy. Cell2004 ,117, 399–412. [CrossRef]
119. Mammucari, C.; Milan, G.; Romanello, V .; Masiero, E.; Rudolf, R.; Del Piccolo, P .; Burden, S.J.; Di Lisi, R.;
Sandri, C.; Zhao, J.; et al. FoxO3 controls autophagy in skeletal muscle in vivo .Cell Metab. 2007 ,6, 458–471.
[CrossRef]
120. Cai, D.; Frantz, J.D.; Tawa, N.E.; Melendez, P .A.; Oh, B.-C.; Lidov, H.G.W.; Hasselgren, P .-O.; Frontera, W.R.;
Lee, J.; Glass, D.J.; et al. IKKbeta /NF-kappaB activation causes severe muscle wasting in mice. Cell2004 ,119,
285–298. [CrossRef]
121. Judge, A.R.; Koncarevic, A.; Hunter, R.B.; Liou, H.C.; Jackman, R.W.; Kandarian, S.C. Role for IkappaBalpha,
but not c-Rel, in skeletal muscle atrophy. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2007 ,292, C372–C382. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
122. Sanchez, A.M.J.; Candau, R.B.; Bernardi, H. FoxO transcription factors: Their roles in the maintenance of
skeletal muscle homeostasis. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2013 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Accili, D.; Arden, K.C. FoxOs at the crossroads of cellular metabolism, di erentiation, and transformation.
Cell2004 ,117, 421–426. [CrossRef]
124. Smith, I.J.; Alamdari, N.; O’Neal, P .; Gonnella, P .; Aversa, Z.; Hasselgren, P .-O. Sepsis increases the
expression and activity of the transcription factor Forkhead Box O 1 (FOXO1) in skeletal muscle by a
glucocorticoid-dependent mechanism. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2010 ,42, 701–711. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Senf, S.M.; Dodd, S.L.; McClung, J.M.; Judge, A.R. Hsp70 overexpression inhibits NF-kappaB and Foxo3a
transcriptional activities and prevents skeletal muscle atrophy. FASEB J. 2008 ,22, 3836–3845. [CrossRef]
126. Brocca, L.; Toniolo, L.; Reggiani, C.; Bottinelli, R.; Sandri, M.; Pellegrino, M.A. FoxO-dependent atrogenes
vary among catabolic conditions and play a key role in muscle atrophy induced by hindlimb suspension.
J. Physiol. 2017 ,595, 1143–1158. [CrossRef]
127. O’Neill, B.T.; Bhardwaj, G.; Penniman, C.M.; Krumpoch, M.T.; Suarez Beltran, P .A.; Klaus, K.; Poro, K.; Li, M.;
Pan, H.; Dreyfuss, J.M.; et al. FOXO transcription factors are critical regulators of diabetes-related muscle
atrophy. Diabetes 2019 ,68, 556–570. [CrossRef]
128. Greer, E.L.; Oskoui, P .R.; Banko, M.R.; Maniar, J.M.; Gygi, M.P .; Gygi, S.P .; Brunet, A. The energy sensor
AMP-activated protein kinase directly regulates the mammalian FOXO3 transcription factor. J. Biol. Chem.
2007 ,282, 30107–30119. [CrossRef]
129. Sanchez, A.M.J.; Csibi, A.; Raibon, A.; Cornille, K.; Gay, S.; Bernardi, H.; Candau, R. AMPK promotes skeletal
muscle autophagy through activation of forkhead FoxO3a and interaction with Ulk1. J. Cell. Biochem. 2012 ,
113, 695–710. [CrossRef]
130. Bertaggia, E.; Coletto, L.; Sandri, M. Posttranslational modiﬁcations control FoxO3 activity during denervation.
Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2012 ,302, C587–C596. [CrossRef]
131. Andres-Mateos, E.; Brinkmeier, H.; Burks, T.N.; Mejias, R.; Files, D.C.; Steinberger, M.; Soleimani, A.; Marx, R.;
Simmers, J.L.; Lin, B.; et al. Activation of serum /glucocorticoid-induced kinase 1 (SGK1) is important to
maintain skeletal muscle homeostasis and prevent atrophy. EMBO Mol. Med. 2013 ,5, 80–91. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 25 of 28
132. Brunet, A.; Park, J.; Tran, H.; Hu, L.S.; Hemmings, B.A.; Greenberg, M.E. Protein Kinase SGK Mediates
Survival Signals by Phosphorylating the Forkhead Transcription Factor FKHRL1 (FOXO3a). Mol. Cell. Biol.
2001 ,21, 952–965. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Asada, S.; Daitoku, H.; Matsuzaki, H.; Saito, T.; Sudo, T.; Mukai, H.; Iwashita, S.; Kako, K.; Kishi, T.; Kasuya, Y.;
et al. Mitogen-activated protein kinases, Erk and p38, phosphorylate and regulate Foxo1. Cell. Signal. 2007 ,
19, 519–527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Yang, J.-Y.Y.; Zong, C.S.; Xia, W.; Yamaguchi, H.; Ding, Q.; Xie, X.; Lang, J.-Y.Y.; Lai, C.-C.C.; Chang, C.-J.J.;
Huang, W.-C.C.; et al. ERK promotes tumorigenesis by inhibiting FOXO3a via MDM2-mediated degradation.
Nat. Cell Biol. 2008 ,10, 138–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Essers, M.A.G.; Weijzen, S.; De Vries-Smits, A.M.M.; Saarloos, I.; De Ruiter, N.D.; Bos, J.L.; Burgering, B.M.T.
FOXO transcription factor activation by oxidative stress mediated by the small GTPase Ral and JNK. EMBO J.
2004 ,23, 4802–4812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Oh, S.W.; Mukhopadhyay, A.; Svrzikapa, N.; Jiang, F.; Davis, R.J.; Tissenbaum, H.A. JNK regulates lifespan
in Caenorhabiditis elegans by modulating nuclear translocation of forkhead transcription factor /DAF-16.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005 ,102, 4494–4499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Hu, M.C.T.; Lee, D.F.; Xia, W.; Golfman, L.S.; Ou-Yang, F.; Yang, J.Y.; Zou, Y.; Bao, S.; Hanada, N.; Saso, H.; et al.
IB kinase promotes tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a. Cell2004 ,117, 225–237. [CrossRef]
138. Wei, B.; Dui, W.; Liu, D.; Xing, Y.; Yuan, Z.; Ji, G. MST1, a key player, in enhancing fast skeletal muscle
atrophy. BMC Biol. 2013 ,11, 12. [CrossRef]
139. Lehtinen, M.K.; Yuan, Z.; Boag, P .R.; Yang, Y.; Vill én, J.; Becker, E.B.E.; DiBacco, S.; de la Iglesia, N.; Gygi, S.;
Blackwell, T.K.; et al. A Conserved MST-FOXO Signaling Pathway Mediates Oxidative-Stress Responses and
Extends Life Span. Cell2006 ,125, 987–1001. [CrossRef]
140. Webb, A.E.; Brunet, A. FOXO transcription factors: Key regulators of cellular quality control. Trends Biochem. Sci.
2014 ,39, 159–169. [CrossRef]
141. Beharry, A.W.; Sandesara, P .B.; Roberts, B.M.; Ferreira, L.F.; Senf, S.M.; Judge, A.R. HDAC1 activates FoxO
and is both su cient and required for skeletal muscle atrophy. J. Cell Sci. 2014 ,127, 1441–1453. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
142. Lee, D.; Goldberg, A.L. SIRT1 protein, by blocking the activities of transcription factors FoxO1 and FoxO3,
inhibits muscle atrophy and promotes muscle growth. J. Biol. Chem. 2013 ,288, 30515–30526. [CrossRef]
143. Choi, S.; Jeong, H.J.; Kim, H.; Choi, D.; Cho, S.C.; Seong, J.K.; Koo, S.H.; Kang, J.S. Skeletal muscle-speciﬁc
Prmt1 deletion causes muscle atrophy via deregulation of the PRMT6-FOXO3 axis. Autophagy 2019 ,15,
1069–1081. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Sandri, M.; Lin, J.; Handschin, C.; Yang, W.; Arany, Z.P .; Lecker, S.H.; Goldberg, A.L.; Spiegelman, B.M.
PGC-1alpha protects skeletal muscle from atrophy by suppressing FoxO3 action and atrophy-speciﬁc gene
transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2006 ,103, 16260–16265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Brault, J.J.; Jespersen, J.G.; Goldberg, A.L. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator
1alpha or 1beta overexpression inhibits muscle protein degradation, induction of ubiquitin ligases, and disuse
atrophy. J. Biol. Chem. 2010 ,285, 19460–19471. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Waddell, D.S.; Baehr, L.M.; Van Den Brandt, J.; Johnsen, S.A.; Reichardt, H.M.; Furlow, J.D.; Bodine, S.C.
The glucocorticoid receptor and FOXO1 synergistically activate the skeletal muscle atrophy-associated
MuRF1 gene. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2008 ,295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Okada, K.; Naito, A.T.; Higo, T.; Nakagawa, A.; Shibamoto, M.; Sakai, T.; Hashimoto, A.; Kuramoto, Y.;
Sumida, T.; Nomura, S.; et al. Wnt /-catenin signaling contributes to skeletal myopathy in heart failure via
direct interaction with forkhead box o. Circ. Hear. Fail. 2015 ,8, 799–808. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Yin, J.; Yang, L.; Xie, Y.; Liu, Y.; Li, S.; Yang, W.; Xu, B.; Ji, H.; Ding, L.; Wang, K.; et al. Dkk3 dependent
transcriptional regulation controls age related skeletal muscle atrophy. Nat. Commun. 2018 ,9. [CrossRef]
149. Shimizu, N.; Maruyama, T.; Yoshikawa, N.; Matsumiya, R.; Ma, Y.; Ito, N.; Tasaka, Y.; Kuribara-Souta, A.;
Miyata, K.; Oike, Y.; et al. A muscle-liver-fat signalling axis is essential for central control of adaptive adipose
remodelling. Nat. Commun. 2015 ,6, 6693. [CrossRef]
150. Shimizu, N.; Yoshikawa, N.; Ito, N.; Maruyama, T.; Suzuki, Y.; Takeda, S.; Nakae, J.; Tagata, Y.; Nishitani, S.;
Takehana, K.; et al. Crosstalk between Glucocorticoid Receptor and Nutritional Sensor mTOR in Skeletal
Muscle. Cell Metab. 2011 ,13, 170–182. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 26 of 28
151. Qin, W.; Pan, J.; Qin, Y.; Lee, D.N.; Bauman, W.A.; Cardozo, C. Identiﬁcation of functional glucocorticoid
response elements in the mouse FoxO1 promoter. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2014 ,450, 979–983.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Segatto, M.; Fittipaldi, R.; Pin, F.; Sartori, R.; Dae Ko, K.; Zare, H.; Fenizia, C.; Zanchettin, G.; Pierobon, E.S.;
Hatakeyama, S.; et al. Epigenetic targeting of bromodomain protein BRD4 counteracts cancer cachexia and
prolongs survival. Nat. Commun. 2017 ,8, 1707. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Bowman, C.J.; Ayer, D.E.; Dynlacht, B.D. Foxk proteins repress the initiation of starvation-induced atrophy
and autophagy programs. Nat. Cell Biol. 2014 ,16, 1202–1214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Mourkioti, F.; Kratsios, P .; Luedde, T.; Song, Y.H.; Delafontaine, P .; Adami, R.; Parente, V .; Bottinelli, R.;
Pasparakis, M.; Rosenthal, N. Targeted ablation of IKK2 improves skeletal muscle strength, maintains mass,
and promotes regeneration. J. Clin. Invest. 2006 ,116, 2945–2954. [CrossRef]
155. Mittal, A.; Bhatnagar, S.; Kumar, A.; Lach-Triﬁlie , E.; Wauters, S.; Li, H.; Makonchuk, D.Y.; Glass, D.J.;
Kumar, A. The TWEAK-Fn14 system is a critical regulator of denervation-induced skeletal muscle atrophy
in mice. J. Cell Biol. 2010 ,188, 833–849. [CrossRef]
156. Wu, C.L.; Kandarian, S.C.; Jackman, R.W. Identiﬁcation of genes that elicit disuse muscle atrophy via the
transcription factors p50 and Bcl-3. PLoS ONE 2011 ,6, e16171. [CrossRef]
157. Sun, L.; Si, M.; Liu, X.; Choi, J.M.; Wang, Y.; Thomas, S.S.; Peng, H.; Hu, Z. Long-noncoding RNA Atrolnc-1
promotes muscle wasting in mice with chronic kidney disease. J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle 2018 ,9, 962–974.
[CrossRef]
158. Bonetto, A.; Aydogdu, T.; Jin, X.; Zhang, Z.; Zhan, R.; Puzis, L.; Koniaris, L.G.; Zimmers, T.A. JAK /STAT3
pathway inhibition blocks skeletal muscle wasting downstream of IL-6 and in experimental cancer cachexia.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2012 ,303. [CrossRef]
159. Silva, K.A.S.; Dong, J.; Dong, Y.; Dong, Y.; Schor, N.; Tweardy, D.J.; Zhang, L.; Mitch, W.E. Inhibition of Stat3
activation suppresses caspase-3 and the ubiquitin-proteasome system, leading to preservation of muscle
mass in cancer cachexia. J. Biol. Chem. 2015 ,290, 11177–11187. [CrossRef]
160. Cohen, T.J.; Waddell, D.S.; Barrientos, T.; Lu, Z.; Feng, G.; Cox, G.A.; Bodine, S.C.; Yao, T.P . The histone
deacetylase HDAC4 connects neural activity to muscle transcriptional reprogramming. J. Biol. Chem. 2007 ,
282, 33752–33759. [CrossRef]
161. Tang, H.; Goldman, D. Activity-dependent gene regulation in skeletal muscle is mediated by a histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-Dach2-myogenin signal transduction cascade. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2006 ,103,
16977–16982. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Moresi, V .; Williams, A.H.; Meadows, E.; Flynn, J.M.; Pottho , M.J.; McAnally, J.; Shelton, J.M.; Backs, J.;
Klein, W.H.; Richardson, J.A.; et al. Myogenin and class II HDACs control neurogenic muscle atrophy by
inducing E3 ubiquitin ligases. Cell2010 ,143, 35–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Luo, L.; Martin, S.C.; Parkington, J.; Cadena, S.M.; Zhu, J.; Ibebunjo, C.; Summermatter, S.; Londraville, N.;
Patora-Komisarska, K.; Widler, L.; et al. HDAC4 Controls Muscle Homeostasis through Deacetylation of
Myosin Heavy Chain, PGC-1 , and Hsc70. Cell Rep. 2019 ,29, 749–763.e12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Ebert, S.M.; Dyle, M.C.; Kunkel, S.D.; Bullard, S.A.; Bongers, K.S.; Fox, D.K.; Dierdor , J.M.; Foster, E.D.;
Adams, C.M. Stress-induced skeletal muscle Gadd45a expression reprograms myonuclei and causes muscle
atrophy. J. Biol. Chem. 2012 ,287, 27290–27301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
165. Ebert, S.M.; Monteys, A.M.; Fox, D.K.; Bongers, K.S.; Shields, B.E.; Malmberg, S.E.; Davidson, B.L.;
Suneja, M.; Adams, C.M. The transcription factor ATF4 promotes skeletal myoﬁber atrophy during fasting.
Mol. Endocrinol. 2010 ,24, 790–799. [CrossRef]
166. Ogata, M.; Hino, S.; Saito, A.; Morikawa, K.; Kondo, S.; Kanemoto, S.; Murakami, T.; Taniguchi, M.; Tanii, I.;
Yoshinaga, K.; et al. Autophagy is activated for cell survival after endoplasmic reticulum stress. Mol. Cell. Biol.
2006 ,26, 9220–9231. [CrossRef]
167. Li, J.; Ni, M.; Lee, B.; Barron, E.; Hinton, D.R.; Lee, A.S. The unfolded protein response regulator GRP78 /BiP is
required for endoplasmic reticulum integrity and stress-induced autophagy in mammalian cells. Cell Death Differ.
2008 ,15, 1460–1471. [CrossRef]
168. B’chir, W.; Maurin, A.-C.; Carraro, V .; Averous, J.; Jousse, C.; Muranishi, Y .; Parry , L.; Stepien, G.; Fafournoux, P .;
Bruhat, A. The eIF2 /ATF4 pathway is essential for stress-induced autophagy gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res.
2013 ,41, 7683–7699. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 27 of 28
169. Yu, Z.; Wang, A.M.; Adachi, H.; Katsuno, M.; Sobue, G.; Yue, Z.; Robins, D.M.; Lieberman, A.P .
Macroautophagy is regulated by the UPR-mediator CHOP and accentuates the phenotype of SBMA
mice. PLoS Genet. 2011 ,7, e1002321. [CrossRef]
170. Gallot, Y.S.; Bohnert, K.R.; Straughn, A.R.; Xiong, G.; Hindi, S.M.; Kumar, A. PERK regulates skeletal muscle
mass and contractile function in adult mice. FASEB J. 2019 ,33, 1946–1962. [CrossRef]
171. Bohnert, K.R.; Goli, P .; Roy, A.; Sharma, A.K.; Xiong, G.; Gallot, Y.S.; Kumar, A. The Toll-Like Receptor /
MyD88 /XBP1 Signaling Axis Mediates Skeletal Muscle Wasting during Cancer Cachexia. Mol. Cell. Biol.
2019 ,39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Tezze, C.; Romanello, V .; Desbats, M.A.; Fadini, G.P .; Albiero, M.; Favaro, G.; Ciciliot, S.; Soriano, M.E.;
Morbidoni, V .; Cerqua, C.; et al. Age-Associated Loss of OPA1 in Muscle Impacts Muscle Mass, Metabolic
Homeostasis, Systemic Inﬂammation, and Epithelial Senescence. Cell Metab. 2017 ,25, 1374–1389.e6.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
173. Favaro, G.; Romanello, V .; Varanita, T.; Andrea Desbats, M.; Morbidoni, V .; Tezze, C.; Albiero, M.; Canato, M.;
Gherardi, G.; De Stefani, D.; et al. DRP1-mediated mitochondrial shape controls calcium homeostasis and
muscle mass. Nat. Commun. 2019 ,10, 2576. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
174. Soares, R.J.; Cagnin, S.; Chemello, F.; Silvestrin, M.; Musaro, A.; De Pitta, C.; Lanfranchi, G.; Sandri, M.
Involvement of microRNAs in the regulation of muscle wasting during catabolic conditions. J. Biol. Chem.
2014 ,289, 21909–21925. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Hudson, M.B.; Rahnert, J.A.; Zheng, B.; Woodworth-Hobbs, M.E.; Franch, H.A.; Russ Price, S. miR-182
attenuates atrophy-related gene expression by targeting FoxO3 in skeletal muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.
2014 ,307, C314–C319. [CrossRef]
176. Ringholm, S.; Biensø, R.S.; Kiilerich, K.; Guadalupe-Grau, A.; Aachmann-Andersen, N.J.; Saltin, B.;
Plomgaard, P .; Lundby, C.; Wojtaszewski, J.F.P .; Calbet, J.A.; et al. Bed rest reduces metabolic protein
content and abolishes exercise-induced mRNA responses in human skeletal muscle. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2011 ,301, E649–E658. [CrossRef]
177. Jeng, S.F.; Rau, C.S.; Liliang, P .C.; Wu, C.J.; Lu, T.H.; Chen, Y.C.; Lin, C.J.; Hsieh, C.H. Proﬁling muscle-speciﬁc
microRNA expression after peripheral denervation and reinnervation in a rat model. J. Neurotrauma 2009 ,26,
2345–2353. [CrossRef]
178. Bai, L.; Liang, R.; Yang, Y.; Hou, X.; Wang, Z.; Zhu, S.; Wang, C.; Tang, Z.; Li, K. MicroRNA-21 regulates
PI3K /Akt/mTOR signaling by targeting TGF I during skeletal muscle development in pigs. PLoS ONE
2015 ,10. [CrossRef]
179. Meyer, S.U.; Thirion, C.; Polesskaya, A.; Bauersachs, S.; Kaiser, S.; Krause, S.; Pfa , M.W. TNF-and IGF1
modify the microRNA signature in skeletal muscle cell di erentiation. Cell Commun. Signal. 2015 ,13, 4.
[CrossRef]
180. Conte, M.; Armani, A.; Conte, G.; Serra, A.; Franceschi, C.; Mele, M.; Sandri, M.; Salvioli, S. Muscle-specific Perilipin2
down-regulation affects lipid metabolism and induces myofiber hypertrophy . J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle 2019 ,
10, 95–110. [CrossRef]
181. Wicks, K.L.; Hood, D.A. Mitochondrial adaptations in denervated muscle: Relationship to muscle performance.
Am. J. Physiol. 1991 ,260, C841–C850. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
182. Wenz, T.; Rossi, S.G.; Rotundo, R.L.; Spiegelman, B.M.; Moraes, C.T. Increased muscle PGC-1alpha expression
protects from sarcopenia and metabolic disease during aging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2009 ,106,
20405–20410. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
183. Sacheck, J.M.; Hyatt, J.-P .K.P .; Ra aello, A.; Jagoe, R.T.; Roy, R.R.; Edgerton, V .R.; Lecker, S.H.; Goldberg, A.L.
Rapid disuse and denervation atrophy involve transcriptional changes similar to those of muscle wasting
during systemic diseases. FASEB J. 2007 ,21, 140–155. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
184. Adhihetty, P .J.; O’Leary, M.F.N.; Chabi, B.; Wicks, K.L.; Hood, D.A. E ect of denervation on mitochondrially
mediated apoptosis in skeletal muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 2007 ,102, 1143–1151. [CrossRef]
185. Wagatsuma, A.; Kotake, N.; Mabuchi, K.; Yamada, S. Expression of nuclear-encoded genes involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis and dynamics in experimentally denervated muscle. J. Physiol. Biochem. 2011 ,67,
359–370. [CrossRef]
186. Kang, C.; Ji, L.L. Muscle immobilization and remobilization downregulates PGC-1 signaling and the
mitochondrial biogenesis pathway. J. Appl. Physiol. 2013 ,115, 1618–1625. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 4759 28 of 28
187. Booth, F.W.; Lou, W.; Hamilton, M.T.; Yan, Z. Cytochrome c mRNA in skeletal muscles of immobilized limbs.
J. Appl. Physiol. 1996 ,81, 1941–1945. [CrossRef]
188. Ruas, J.L.; White, J.P .; Rao, R.R.; Kleiner, S.; Brannan, K.T.; Harrison, B.C.; Greene, N.P .; Wu, J.; Estall, J.L.;
Irving, B.A.; et al. A PGC-1 Isoform Induced by Resistance Training Regulates Skeletal Muscle Hypertrophy.
Cell2012 ,151, 1319–1331. [CrossRef]
189. White, J.P .; Wrann, C.D.; Rao, R.R.; Nair, S.K.; Jedrychowski, M.P .; You, J.-S.; Mart ínez-Redondo, V .; Gygi, S.P .;
Ruas, J.L.; Hornberger, T.A.; et al. G protein-coupled receptor 56 regulates mechanical overload-induced
muscle hypertrophy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014 ,111, 15756–15761. [CrossRef]
190. Iqbal, S.; Ostojic, O.; Singh, K.; Joseph, A.-M.; Hood, D.A. Expression of mitochondrial ﬁssion and fusion
regulatory proteins in skeletal muscle during chronic use and disuse. Muscle Nerve 2013 ,48, 963–970.
[CrossRef]
191. Romanello, V .; Guadagnin, E.; Gomes, L.; Roder, I.; Sandri, C.; Petersen, Y.; Milan, G.; Masiero, E.;
Del Piccolo, P .; Foretz, M.; et al. Mitochondrial ﬁssion and remodelling contributes to muscle atrophy.
EMBO J. 2010 ,29, 1774–1785. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
192. Romanello, V .; Scalabrin, M.; Albiero, M.; Blaauw, B.; Scorrano, L.; Sandri, M. Inhibition of the Fission
Machinery Mitigates OPA1 Impairment in Adult Skeletal Muscles. Cells 2019 ,8, 597. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
193. Larsson, L.; Degens, H.; Li, M.; Salviati, L.; Lee, Y., II; Thompson, W.; Kirkland, J.L.; Sandri, M. Sarcopenia:
Aging-Related Loss of Muscle Mass and Function. Physiol. Rev. 2019 ,99, 427–511. [CrossRef]
194. Kravic, B.; Harbauer, A.B.; Romanello, V .; Simeone, L.; Vögtle, F.N.; Kaiser, T.; Straubinger, M.; Huraskin, D.;
Böttcher, M.; Cerqua, C.; et al. In mammalian skeletal muscle, phosphorylation of TOMM22 by protein
kinase CSNK2 /CK2 controls mitophagy. Autophagy 2018 ,14, 311–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Das, S.; Morvan, F.; Jourde, B.; Meier, V .; Kahle, P .; Brebbia, P .; Toussaint, G.; Glass, D.J.; Fornaro, M. ATP citrate
lyase improves mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle. Cell Metab. 2015 ,21, 868–876. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
196. Das, S.; Morvan, F.; Morozzi, G.; Jourde, B.; Minetti, G.C.; Kahle, P .; Rivet, H.; Brebbia, P .; Toussaint, G.;
Glass, D.J.; et al. ATP Citrate Lyase Regulates Myoﬁber Di erentiation and Increases Regeneration by
Altering Histone Acetylation. Cell Rep. 2017 ,21, 3003–3011. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Pin, F.; Novinger, L.J.; Huot, J.R.; Harris, R.A.; Couch, M.E.; O’Connell, T.M.; Bonetto, A. PDK4 drives
metabolic alterations and muscle atrophy in cancer cachexia. FASEB J. 2019 ,33, 7778–7790. [CrossRef]
198. Gherardi, G.; Nogara, L.; Ciciliot, S.; Fadini, G.P .; Blaauw, B.; Braghetta, P .; Bonaldo, P .; De Stefani, D.;
Rizzuto, R.; Mammucari, C. Loss of mitochondrial calcium uniporter rewires skeletal muscle metabolism
and substrate preference. Cell Death Di er.2019 ,26, 362–381. [CrossRef]
199. Mammucari, C.; Gherardi, G.; Zamparo, I.; Ra aello, A.; Boncompagni, S.; Chemello, F.; Cagnin, S.; Braga, A.;
Zanin, S.; Pallafacchina, G.; et al. The Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter Controls Skeletal Muscle Trophism
InVivo. Cell Rep. 2015 ,10, 1269–1279. [CrossRef]
200. Parajuli, P .; Kumar, S.; Loumaye, A.; Singh, P .; Eragamreddy, S.; Nguyen, T.L.; Ozkan, S.; Razzaque, M.S.;
Prunier, C.; Thissen, J.P .; et al. Twist1 Activation in Muscle Progenitor Cells Causes Muscle Loss Akin to
Cancer Cachexia. Dev. Cell 2018 ,45, 712–725.e6. [CrossRef]
201. Zhang, G.; Liu, Z.; Ding, H.; Zhou, Y.; Doan, H.A.; Sin, K.W.T.; Zhu, Z.J.; Flores, R.; Wen, Y.; Gong, X.; et al.
Tumor induces muscle wasting in mice through releasing extracellular Hsp70 and Hsp90. Nat. Commun.
2017 ,8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
202. Talbert, E.E.; Guttridge, D.C. Impaired regeneration: A role for the muscle microenvironment in cancer
cachexia. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2016 ,54, 82–91. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. He, W.A.; Berardi, E.; Cardillo, V .M.; Acharyya, S.; Aulino, P .; Thomas-Ahner, J.; Wang, J.; Bloomston, M.;
Muscarella, P .; Nau, P .; et al. NF- B-mediated Pax7 dysregulation in the muscle microenvironment promotes
cancer cachexia. J. Clin. Invest. 2013 ,123, 4821–4835. [CrossRef]
204. Madaro, L.; Passafaro, M.; Sala, D.; Etxaniz, U.; Lugarini, F.; Proietti, D.; Alfonsi, M.V .; Nicoletti, C.; Gatto, S.;
De Bardi, M.; et al. Denervation-activated STAT3–IL-6 signalling in ﬁbro-adipogenic progenitors promotes
myoﬁbres atrophy and ﬁbrosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 2018 ,20, 917–927. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
