                     
 
 
Activity Based Neural and Musculoskeletal Plasticity in Healthcare  
PTRS: 6224   
Fall 2024  
 
 
Course Coordinator:  
Richard K. Shields, PT, PhD, FAPTA  
Professor, Chair & DEO  
Office: 1 -254 MEB  
Phone: 319- 335-9791  
E-mail:  richard -shields@uiowa.edu  
Office hours: by appointment through Carol Leigh ( carol -leigh@uiowa.edu ) 
 Lab Assistants:  
Michael Petrie, BSE, DC, PhD ( michael -petrie@uiowa.edu
) 
Olga Dubey, MD ( olga-dubey@uiowa.edu ) 
Chishan Shiao ( chishan- shiao@uiowa.edu ) 
Jason Wu ( jason -wu@uiowa.edu ) 
 
Course Description : 
In this course students will use c ritical thinking skills to evaluate existing literature and build novel 
hypothes es around activity -based plasticity —and how it influences overall health.   Learners  will 
triangulate information from online lectures (flipped), contemporary readings, and in- class 
discussion s to develop a n “in depth” appreciat ion of the complexities involved with movement  and 
how it may signal tissues to impact overall health and well -being.  Quality movement requires 
efficient coordination among all systems to maximize function and optimize performance.  Accordingly, we review key concepts related to muscle mechanics, muscle activation,  metabolism, 
nutrition, hypertrophy/atrophy, genomics/epigenetics, cognitive function,  fatigue, and sensory -motor 
control . We discuss crosstalk among tissues and how pleiotropism at the gene level mediates cells 
and tissue adaptations.  The course ends by applying scientific based principles to better understand 
how to optimize movement among people with spinal cord injury.  
  
Course Website:  
The course site can be accessed using the University course management ICON at 
https://icon.uiowa.edu
. You will need your HAWK ID and password to log- in. 
 Zoom Meeting Link:  
None
  
 Credit  Hours:  
4 semester hours   
 

 2 Contact H ours :       
Interactive lecture and discussion: 4hrs/week  
 
Course Time and Location:   
Wednesdays & Fridays 8:00- 10:20  
Room 1-261 MEB or as announced (see schedule)  
  
Prerequisites :  
Enrolled in the Department of Physical Therapy & Rehabilitation Science or by special permission of 
the instructor.  Biology, general physiology, neuroscience, kinesiology, pathology, and anatomy.  
 
Course Objectives:  
Following this course, students will be able to:  
1. Analyze contemporary and classic literature in order to understand the plasticity of molecular 
signaling pathways, cells, tissues, and organs with emphasis on response to movement based 
physiological stress.   
2. Formulate an understanding of the complexity of an adaptive system and implement strategies to 
become a solid consumer of the underlying basis for why movement, exercise, mechanical tissue 
forces, and environmental stresses may regulate key tissue function.  
3. Integrate key concepts of anatomy, kinesiology, neuroscience, motor control, exercise physiology, genomics /epigenetics , and pathology to analyze and understand movement control 
problems in people with reduced activity from injury, surgery, pain, or age.  
4. Develop the scientific basis to prescribe exercise, physical activity, or movement control strategies for people with and without injury, disease, pain, addiction, surgery across the 
lifespan.  
 Learning Objectives:   
Throughout this course , students will  learn to :  
1. Explain the links between therapeutic movement and genomics/ epigenetics, mitochondrial 
function, metabolic disease, accelerated aging (methylation) and crosstalk among various 
tissues and decribe  how epigenetics may be applied to the ICF model.  
2. Describe how skeletal muscle is a powerful endocrine organ with the capacity to release myo-
kines into the bloodstream and trigger CNS plasticity and regulate other tissues associated with 
metabolic disease including bone, liver, and islet cells.  Integ rate importance about novel findings 
that Extracellular Vesicles exist and what that may mean in terms of mRNA and microRNA and ultimately form the underlying basis for crosstalk among human movement systems.  
3. Describe the structure and function of motor units and compare their functions according to the size principle.  
4. Assess the developmental basis for specific motor units aligning with certain muscle fiber 
histochemistry and gene expression.  
5. Analyze the evidence supporting that the nervous system adapts during strength training.  
6. Formulate the basis for adaptations in skeletal muscle associated with "reduced use".  
7. Differentiate the primary sites associated with fatigue in the segmental and central nervous system.  
8. Describe the adaptations associated with strength versus endurance training.  
9. Propose the hypothesis for the torque -velocity relationship (Hill's equation) and length -tension 
relation from a CNS control perspective including new information on titin and its contribution to 
transient and steady force enhancement.  
10. Explain the equilibrium -point hypothesis in motor control and the importance of the peripheral 
muscle mechanical properties.  
11. Contrast the findings associated with various models of disuse induced by spinal cord injury, 
peripheral nerve injury, weightlessness, and casting.  
 3 12. Examine how simple reflexes function including the alpha and gamma systems.  
13. Formulate the physiological basis for a "clasp knife response" as seen in complete spinal injured 
patients.  
14. Discuss the sophistication of complex reflexes, their ability to modulate, and research evidence supporting their existence.  
15. Discriminate/differentiate among the terms motor control, motor learning, motor development, 
and motor program.  
16. Evaluate the differences between the hierarchical and parallel model of motor control.  
17. Examine the application of movement principles in physical therapy practice.  
18. Explain the problems the CNS is confronted with regarding control of an infinite number of 
movements.  
19. Compare between normal synergies and pathological synergies and distinguish differences in 
stiffness.  
20. Define coordination as it pertains to motor control principles.  
21. Review an example of a generalized motor program, an invariant in a motor program, and the 
parameters of a motor program.  
22. Criticize the key elements that supported the centralist and peripheralist theory of movement 
control.  
23. Compare between knowledge of performance and knowledge of results as forms of feedback 
during motor learning.  
24. Analyze the significance of the triphasic burst with regard to the centralist view of movement control.  
25. Discuss anticipatory motor responses during handgrip and upright postural control.  
26. Define central set and how patient motivation might influence patient balance performance.  
27. Explain the basis for the sensory organization test and how it assesses components of somato -
sensory control for posture and balance.  
28. Describe the relevance of long latency responses following limb perturbation under normal and 
pathological conditions.  
29. Rank human performance tests used to assess balance including the Berg balance scale, 
functional reach tests, and self -reported questionnaires.  
30. Report the role of the sensory pathways (anterolateral spinothalamic, spinocerebellar, dorsal columns) in various types of incomplete spinal cord injuries.  
31. Describe  motor pathway anatomy (corticospinal, rubrospinal, reticulospinal, vestibulospinal) to 
explain residual function in persons with incomplete spinal lesions.  
32. Contrast clinical signs and symptoms for patients with basal ganglia and cerebellar disorders.  
33. Demonstrate the ability to comprehend contemporary research articles evaluating feedforward, central, and peripheral components of motor control.  
34. Demonstrate an outcomes -oriented approach when evaluating movement control problems in 
patients with spinal cord injury, stroke, Parkinson’s, and cerebellar disease.  
35. Identify the assumptions underlying some of the neurophysiological treatment approaches.  
36. Distinguish between cranial nerve tests that influence clinical decision making from those that do not influence clinical decision making.  
37. Describe the use of the University of Iowa level of assistance scales when assessing function.  
38. Recognize the neurological changes that occur over the entire lifespan (infancy to elderly) and 
how they can be influenced by exercise.  
39. Integrate principles of motor control and learning to patients with ACL deficiency, low back pain, 
and hip arthritis.  
40. Demonstrate an understanding of the autonomic nervous system by explaining the basis for autonomic hyperreflexia in patients with complete spinal cord injury.  
41. Demonstrate knowledge of segmental motor levels by determining the precise level (using ASIA 
criteria) for an individual with a spinal cord injury.  
42. Explain the physiological basis for higher risk of pressure sores in patients with acute SCI.  
 4 43. Describe the pathomechanics leading to a claw hand.  
44. Explain how poor wheelchair posture may contribute to the development of a pressure sore in 
patients with SCI.  
45. Discuss the implications of adipose tissue on neural health.  
46. Review the implications of systemic inflammation on cognitive function and aging.  
47. Present the principles of epigenetics and implications to physical therapy.  
48. Discuss the energy systems involved with metabolism of all tissues and the impact of impaired mitochondrial function.  
49. Demonstrate key concepts related to crosstalk among various tissues.  
50. Create and justify a  physical restoration intervention that uses principles of regenerative 
medicine and epigenetics .  
51. Demonstrate how understanding molecular signaling pathways may assist you in 1) consulting a 
dietician/nutritionist; 2) modifying an intervention; 3) developing a new intervention; and 4) 
understanding a mechanism as to why a specific intervention may appear to be effective when 
treating people with movement -based impairments.  
52. Demonstrate an ability to use Cynefin’s Framework to improve clinical decision making and 
reasoning when confronted with complicated and chaotic patient and healthcare conditions.  
 
Affective Objectives:  
You may choose to include affective objectives, such as:  
1. Demonstrate professional behaviors and respect for all speakers by:  
• arriving promptly and not leaving early;   
• turning off all cell phones, or placing them on silent mode; no texting during class;   
• listening  attentively  to all presentations.  
2. Participate in classroom discussions.  
3. Be prepared for class by completing assigned readings prior to class.  
4. Complete all assignments by their deadlines.  
5. Notify the instructor if you must miss a class time or exam.  
 
 
Required and Recommended Course Materials:  
Required texts  : 
 No required textbook.  
 
Recommended texts : 
 No recommended textbooks.  
 
Required readings : 
Learning packets include ~40 contemporary or historically meaningful publications  
 *Learning Packet #1:   Molecular metrics of plasticity, Muscle Properties, Accelerated Aging, 
Telomeres, Exercise, Epigenetics, Muscle, Bone, Nerve Plasticity, Muscle Fatigue, Reduced Use, 
Muscle Strengthening, Metabolism, Molecular Principles with implications to reduced mobility, 
Epigenetics.  
 
*Learning Packet #2:  Spinal mechanisms, reflexes, stretch reflexes, H -reflex, Spasticity, Central 
Pattern Generators, Fictive locomotion, Motor Control Principles, Synergies, Precision Grip, Feedback, Dorsal/Ventral Stream -Perception vs Action, Perspectives on Balance, Forced Use, Use 
Dependent lesions, Higher Center Plasticity, Motor Learning,  
 
*Learning Packet #3:  Spinal Cord Injury  
 
 5  
Instructional  Methods and Learning Experiences:   
You will participate in lecture/lab/demonstration sessions during the semester. You will be challenged to be an active participant in the learning process through class discussion, self -
study/independent discovery.  
 
Student Evaluation/Grading:  
 
This course will utilize course assignments, open questioning, and examinations to evaluate the 
acquisition of course content presented by in -class lectures and discussions , online or pre- recorded 
lectures, and/or assigned readings. All forms of evaluation will examine your ability to acquire and 
apply the knowledge obtained from course content. Examinations will be cumulative due to the inter -
relationship of body systems.  
 In the event of an unavoidable absence, make- up examinations may be offered.   
 There will be three written exams made up of short answer/essay questions.  The questions assess 
your ability to communicate clearly in written form, which is consistent with the documentation/ 
communication required among health care team members. Questions will come from assigned 
readings, discussions, and lecture material. The questions are designed to challenge the learner to 
translate knowledge into  application- improving a learner’s  ability to select, justify, or question a 
clinical intervention.   Reme diation involves retaking questions as it pertains to the identified 
deficiency.  
 Grading is as follows:  
 85-100%  A      <70%        I-Incomplete (remediation)    
70-85% B  <70%        F -Failed remediation   
           
PTRS:6224  Grade Assignment   
3 written exams   75%      
 
In Class Questions   25% 
 
PTRS:6224  Scoring Rubric   
Written exams  and individual classroom questions  are assessed by  how the learner  uses pre -
existing knowledge to justify their response .  The learner will be assessed on their ability to use 
Cynefin’s  Framework when confronted with a decision as related to clinical practice.  
“Four of these domains (i .e., simple, complicated, complex, and chaotic) require clinicians to 
diagnose situations and act in ways that are contextually appropriate. The two domains ‘simple’, 
‘complicated’ —with clear links between cause and effect and where correct answers can be 
determined based on data and facts. The two domains “complex” and “chaos” offers clinical conditions where there is no apparent cause and effect relationship, where emerging patterns must 
inform future actions. ” Health Sci Rep. 2021;4:e363.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

 6 Attendance : 
Attendance is expected.  
 
Classroom Expectations : 
Students are expected to comply with University policies regarding appropriate classroom  behavior 
as outlined in the Code of Student Life .  While students have the right to express themselves and 
participate freely in class, it is expected that students will behave with the same level of courtesy and 
respect in the virtual class setting (whether asynchronous or synchronous) as they would in  an in-
person classroom. Failure to follow behavior expectations as outlined in the Code of Student 
Life may be addressed by the instructor and may also result in discipline under the Code of Student 
Life policies governing E.5 Disruptive Behavior or E.6 Failure to Comply with University Directive.  
 
Course Standards  and Policies:  
 
Professional Behaviors : 
Professional behaviors  are behaviors, attributes, or characteristics that are not explicitly part of a 
profession's core knowledge and technical skills but are nevertheless required for success in that 
profession. Professional behaviors , which define expected behavior within a given profession, serve 
as the foundati on for ability -based learning.  (https://www.marquette.edu/physical -
therapy/documents/professional -behaviors.pdf .)   Students are evaluated by faculty each semester 
regarding their professional behaviors.  The 10 abilities and definitions are listed below:  
1. Critical Thinking -  The ability to question logically; identify, generate and evaluate elements 
of logical argument; recognize and differentiate facts, appropriate or faulty inferences, and 
assumptions; and distinguish relevant from irrelevant information. The ability to appr opriately 
utilize, analyze, and critically evaluate scientific evidence to develop a logical argument, and to identify and determine the impact of bias on the decision- making process.  
2. Communication - The ability to communicate effectively (i.e. verbal, non- verbal, reading, 
writing, and listening) for varied audiences and purposes.  
3. Problem Solving –  The ability to recognize and define problems, analyze data, develop and 
implement solutions, and evaluate outcomes.  
4. Interpersonal Skills –  The ability to interact effectively with patients, families, colleagues, 
other health care professionals, and the community in a culturally aware manner.  
5. Responsibility – The ability to be accountable for the outcomes of personal and professional 
actions and to follow through on commitments that encompass the profession within the 
scope of work, community and social responsibilities.  
6. Professionalism – The ability to exhibit appropriate professional conduct and to represent 
the profession effectively while promoting the growth/development of the Physical Therapy 
profession.  
7. Use of Constructive Feedback –  The ability to seek out and identify quality sources of 
feedback, reflect on and integrate the feedback, and provide meaningful feedback to others.  
8. Effective Use of Time and Resources –  The ability to manage time and resources 
effectively to obtain the maximum possible benefit.  
9. Stress Management – The ability to identify sources of stress and to develop and implement 
effective coping behaviors; this applies for interactions for: self, patient/clients and their families, members of the health care team and in work/life scenarios.  
10. Commitment to Learning – The ability to self -direct learning to include the identification of 
needs and sources of learning; and to continually seek and apply new knowledge, behaviors, 
and skills.  
 
Administration : 
This course adheres to the Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Sciences Policy 
Manual (located on class ICON and department ICON courses). Please refer to this document for 
 7 details on important classroom policies and procedures such as review and promotion, academic 
dishonesty, disciplinary action, student mistreatment, emergency procedures, etc.  In addition, t he 
Rules and Regulations of the Graduate College apply to all students in the Physical Therapy and 
Rehabilitation Science Graduate Program . These rules and regulations are published in the 
University’s General Catalog and a manual is available online at:  
https://grad.uiowa.edu/academics/manual  
Course Evaluation:  Assessing the Classroom Environment (ACE) : 
Every student must  provide their anonymous evaluation of the course and course instructor(s) so 
that we can continuously monitor and improve our educational program.  Our department policy 
requests all instructors provide 15– 20 minutes of class time during final exam week for students to 
complete the online ACE evaluations.  Instructors may make alternate arrangements for their 
specific course if they do not have a final exam or an alternate time works better for their class for 
completion of the ACE evaluations during a scheduled class time. These responses are then 
tabulated and provided to the Instructor(s) and Department Executive Officer after grades have been 
submitted.  Your honest feedback is earnestly considered and is critical to the continued success of 
our program.  
 
Electronic Communication:  
University policy specifies that students are responsible for all official correspondences sent to their 
standard University of Iowa e- mail address (@uiowa.edu). Students should check this account daily . 
 
Electronic Technologies in the Classroom : 
Computers, laptops, mobile devices such as phones and media players are to be used for learning 
exercises.  Professional behavior is expected.  Disruption of the classroom learning experience will 
not be tolerated.  
 
Sharing of Class Recordings (if appropriate) : 
Some of the sessions in this course will be recorded or live- streamed.   Such recordings/streaming 
will only be available to students registered for this class  in the event that they miss the class .  These 
recordings are the intellectual property of the faculty,  and they may not be shared or reproduced 
without the explicit, written consent of the faculty member.   Further, students may not share these 
sessions with those not in the class or upload them to any other online environment.   Doing so would 
be a breach of the Code of Student Conduct, and, in some cases, a violation of state and federal 
law, including the Federal Education Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA).  
 
Non-discrimination Statement : 
The University of Iowa prohibits discrimination in employment, educational programs, and activities 
on the basis of race, creed, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, pregnancy, disability, genetic 
information, status as a U.S. veteran, service in the U.S. military, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
associational preferences, or any other classification that deprives the person of consideration as an 
individual. The university also affirms its commitment to providing equal opportunities and equal 
access to university facilities. For additional information on nondiscrimination policies, contact the 
Director,  Office of Institutional Equity , the University of Iowa, 202 Jessup Hall, Iowa City, IA  52242 -
1316, 319 -335-0705,  oie-ui@uiowa.edu . Students may share their pronouns and chosen/preferred 
names in  MyUI , which is accessible to instructors and advisors.  
 
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities : 
The University is committed to providing an educational experience that is accessible to all 
students.   If a student has a diagnosed disability or other disabling condition that may impact the 
student’s ability to complete the course requirements as stated in the syllabus, the student m ay seek 
accommodations through Student Disability Services  (SDS).   SDS is responsible for making Letters 
 8 of Accommodation (LOA) available to the student.   The student must provide a LOA to the instructor 
as early in the semester as possible, but requests not made at least two weeks prior to the 
scheduled activity for which an accommodation is sought may not be accommodated.  The LOA will 
specify what reasonable course accommodations the student is eligible for and those the instructor 
should provide.  Additional information can be found on the SDS website . 
 
Sexual Harassment /Sexual Misconduct and Supportive Measures : 
The University of Iowa prohibits all forms of sexual harassment, sexual misconduct, and related 
retaliation. The Policy on Sexual Harassment and Sexual Misconduct  governs actions by students, 
faculty, staff and visitors. Incidents of sexual harassment or sexual misconduct can be reported to 
the Title IX and Gender Equity Office  or to the  Department of Public Safety . Students impacted by 
sexual harassment or sexual misconduct may be eligible for academic supportive measures and can 
learn more by  contacting the Title IX and Gender Equity Office . Information about confidential 
resources can be found here. Watch the video for an explanation of these resources.  
 
Mental Health:  
Students are encouraged to be mindful of their mental health and seek help as a preventive measure 
or if feeling overwhelmed and/or struggling to meet course expectations.   Students are encouraged 
to talk to their instructor for assistance with specific class -related concerns.   For additional support 
and counseling, students are encouraged to contact Universi ty Counseling Service 
(UCS).   Information about UCS, including resources and how to schedule an appointment, can be 
found at  counseling.uiowa.edu .  Find out more about UI mental health services 
at:  mentalhealth.uiowa.edu . 
 
Basic Needs and Support for Students : 
Student Care & Assistance provides assistance to University of Iowa students experiencing a variety 
of crisis and emergency situations, including but not limited to medical issues, family emergencies, 
unexpected challenges, and sourcing basic needs such as  food and shelter.  More information on 
the resources related to basic needs can be found at:  basicneeds.uiowa.edu/resources/ .  Students 
are encouraged to contact Student Care & Assistance in the Office of the Dean of Students (Room 
135 IMU,  dos-assistance@uiowa.edu , or 319 -335-1162) for support and assistance with resources.  
 
Academic Fraud:  
Plagiarism and any other activities when students present work that is not their own (cheating) are 
academic fraud.  Examples of academic fraud include:  
• Presentation of ideas from sources that you do not credit;  
• Use of direct quotations without quotation marks and without credit to the source;  
• Paraphrasing information and ideas from sources without credit to the source;  
• Failure to provide adequate citations for material obtained through electronic research;  
• Downloading and submitting work from electronic databases without citation;  
• Participation in a group project which presents plagiarized materials;  
• Taking credit as part of a group without participating as required in the work of the group;  
• Submitting material created/written by someone else as one’s own, including purchased 
term/research papers  or AI generated reports.  
 
These rules and regulations are published in the University’s General Catalog and a manual is 
available online at:  https://grad.uiowa.edu/academics/manual  
 
Concerns about Faculty Actions : 
Students who have a concern about a faculty action should first address the issue with the instructor .  
If you remain unsatisfied you may contact the DEO of the Department of Physical Therapy  and 
 9 Rehabilitation Science, Richard Shields  (319-335-9801).  If the student cannot resolve the issue at 
this level, the concern should be sent in writing to the Dean of the Graduate College.  
 
Reacting Safely to Severe Weather : 
In severe weather, class members should seek appropriate shelter immediately, leaving the 
classroom if necessary. The class will continue, if possible, when the event is over. For more 
information on Hawk Alert and the siren warning system, visit http://hawkalert.uiowa.edu  or 
http://police.uiowa.edu.  
 
Protocol for Handling Emergencies : 
Dial 911 if there is any threat to life or a situation that requires an immediate response from police, fire, or emergency medical services. When dialing from a campus phone, dial 9- 911.  You cannot 
send a text message to 911.    
The following numbers are provided for non ‐emergency situations. Use of these numbers will still 
provide a response from the appropriate agency and keep 911 lines free for actual emergencies.  
University of Iowa Police : 319 ‐335‐5022  
Facility Management (Work Control) : 319 ‐335‐5071 
Information Technology : 319‐384‐4357  
Environmental Health and Safety : 319‐335 ‐8501  
 
Grievance Policy : 
In general, the Department  adheres to the policies of the current issue of the Manual of Rules and 
Regulations of the Graduate College as specified in Section IV . The manual is available online at:  
https://grad.uiowa.edu/academics/manual . In addition, the Department of Physical Therapy and 
Rehabilitation Science has established formal procedures for student grievances, which are detailed 
in the Department Policy Manual . Refer to this document on your class ICON site for more specifics .  
 
Meeting Course Standards : 
Any student who experiences difficulty or anticipates possible difficulty in successfully meeting the course standards is encouraged to speak with the course coordinator as soon as the difficulty is 
suspected. Academic assistance is available through a var iety of University resources such as the 
Tutor Referral Service ( http://tutor.uiowa.edu/find -help/
) and the  Writing Center  
(http://writingcenter.uiowa.edu/ ). See these web pages for details. In addition, physical or mental 
health concerns can be addressed at Student Health (http://studenthealth.uiowa.edu/ ) and the 
University  Counseling Service ( http://counseling.studentlife.uiowa.edu/ ), respectively.   
 
Free Speech and Expression:  
The University of Iowa supports  and upholds  the First Amendment protection of  freedom of 
speech and the principles of  academic and artistic freedom. We are committed to open inquiry, 
vigorous debate, and creative expression inside and outside of the classr oom. Visit the  Free Speech 
at Iowa website  for more information on the university’s policies on free speech and academic 
freedom.  
 
Absences for Religious Holy Days : 
The University is prepared to make reasonable accommodations for students whose religious holy 
days coincide with their classroom assignments, test schedules, and classroom attendance 
expectations.  Students must notify their instructors in writing of any such Religious Holy Day 
conflicts or absences within the first few days of the semester or session, and no later than the third 
week of the semester.   If the conflict or absence will occur within the first three weeks of the 
semester, the student should notify the instructor as soon as possible.   See Operations Manual 8.2 
Absences for Religious Holy Days  for additional information.   
 10  
Course Schedule:  
 
SCHEDULE OF LECTURE AND LABORATORY TOPICS  
(8:00 -10:20 Wednesdays; 8:00 -10:20 Fridays)  
Day Date  Lecture/Laboratory  
W 8/26 Lecture 1  Background  (on ICON):  Plasticity -Adaptation -Outcome Model 
(recommended speed  for all lectures online  1.5X) 
 
Lecture and Discussion/Questions  
 READINGS:  1a, 1b education  
 
F 8/30 Lecture 2 Length -Tension ; Lecture 3 Force -Velocity    
 
Lecture and Discussion/Questions  
 
READINGS:  2a muscle -titan   
W 9/4 Lecture 4 Eccentrics    
 
Lecture and Discussion/Questions  
 
READINGS:  2b muscle -force -velocity   
F 9/6 Lecture 5:  Muscle activation ; Lecture 6: Motor units; Lecture 7: Plasticity  
 Lecture and Discussion/Questions  
 
READINGS 2c muscle -ecc-con-cancer; 2d muscle fatigue sci app  
W 9/11 Lecture and Discussion/Questions  (Back to basics: metabolism)  
 
READINGS 3a metabolism quiz; 3b metabolism review; 3c metabolism 
summary  
F 9/13 Lecture and Discussion/Questions  (Metabolism: Precision PT)  
  
READINGS 3d metabolism ;4a epigenetics -precision rehab; 4b epigenetics -
nature  
W 9/18 Lecture and Discussion/Questions (Aging/epigenetics  
 
READINGS 4c epigenetics -age 
F 9/20 Lecture and Discussion/Questions  
 
READINGS: 5a muscle signaling; 5b muscle memory  
W 9/25 Lecture and Discussion/Questions  
 
READINGS: 6a nutrition/polyphenols; 6b nutrition/caloric restriction  
F 9/27 Lecture and Discussion/Questions  
 
READINGS:  7a sci application -gene; 7b sci application -genomic  
W 10/2 Written Exam #1  
F 10/4 Attend PTRS Summit 8 -12:00  
 
 11 W 10/9 Lecture and Discussion: Questions from readings.  
 
READINGS: 1a, 1b: Brain Metabolism  
F 10/11  Lecture and Discussion: Questions from readings . 
 
READINGS: 1c, 1d:  Brain Metabolism  
W 
 
 10/16  Lecture and Discussion: Questions from readings . 
 
Patient Based Laboratory: 9 -10:30  
 
READINGS: 1e,1f: Brain Metabolism  
F 
NO 
CLASS  10/18  Online Lecture s: Reflexes 1 ; Reflexes 2 :  Clasp -Knife Phenomenon, 
Reinnervation- Cope’s Work, Higher Level “Reflex” Circuits  
 
READINGS: 2a, 2c: Reflexes -H-reflex -Spasticity  
W 10/23  Online Lectures: CPG1 ; CPG2 :  Higher Level Circuits, CPG in Humans, 
Clinical Considerations of Reflexes, Rudimentary Motor Programs  
 Discussion: Questions from lectures  and readings . 
 
READINGS: 2b: Reflex -CPG  
F 10/25  Online Lecture s:  LLR1; LLR2 : Long Latency Reflexes, Triggered Responses, 
Central Set, Functional example (Picking Apples)   
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings . 
 
READINGS:  2d, 2e: LLR-lower  and upper  
W 10/30  Online Lecture :  Balance/Posture : Perturbation Synergies, Sensory 
Organization Test, Sensory Conflict  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READINGS:  none  
F 11/1 Online Lecture: Light touch :  General Motor Control Concepts, Postural 
Control, Lackner and Horak Work  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READINGS:  none  
W 11/6 Online Lecture:   Peripheral -Central Movement : Equilibrium Point Theory, 
Motor Learning Principles  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READING s:  None  
F 11/8 Online Lecture :  Dynamic Position Sense:  Coordination  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READING:  3a: Proprioception -dynamic position  
  
 12 W 11/13  Online Lecture :  Dynamic PS2: Efferent Copy  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READING:  3b: Proprioception: influence of cutaneous  
F 11/15  Online Lecture :  Vision Perception:  Sensory -Motor Control, Visuomotor 
Transformation, Ventral/Dorsal Stream Lesions  
 
Online Lecture :  Dorsal Stream Lesion: Marilyn Belman  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READING:  4a: Perception -dorsal stream..  
W 11/20  Online Lecture:   Forced Use 1 : Cortical Review, Cortical Plasticity, Learned 
Non-use, Use Dependent Sensory Cortex Injury  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READINGS: 5a: Priming -the brain   
F 11/22  Online Lecture: Forced use 2 :  Cortical Excitability and Motor Learning, Heat 
Stress  
 
Discussion: Questions from lectures and readings  
 
READINGS: 5b: Priming -sympathetic; 5c Priming -heat stress  
W 
NO 
CLASS  11/27  THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS  
F 
NO 
CLASS  11/29  THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS  
W 12/4 Online Lecture s SCI1 : SCI2 : SCI3 ; SCI4 : SCI Lesion Types and General 
Anatomy  
SCI Strategies, Mechanisms of Injury, Compressive Flexion, Distractive Flexion, 
Sympathetic NS, Neurogenic Bladder/Sexual Function 
Movement Control Lab  
 
Review for Exam 2 (note: above lectures on SCI are not included on exam 
2) 
F 12/6 Exam 2  
 
W 
No 
Class  12/11  Online Lecture s SCI5 : SCI6 : SCI7 ; SCI8 : Neuro Eval, Vital Capacity, Physical 
Rehab Management, Rehab Issues: Elbows, Wrist, Hand (C6 versus C7), Spine 
Physical Rehab, Spine, Hip, Pelvic -femoral Angle, Seating, Pressure Sores, and 
Principles of Measurement  
 
READINGS : 1-5 packet 3  
F 12/13  Questions/Discussion/Review  
Readings: (1 -5 packet 3)  
M 12/16  FINAL COMPREHENSIVE EXAM – 9:00-11:00  
Course ACE Reviews will be completed after the Final Exam  
 
